Last revision: June 9, 2018	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE BONITATE ET MALITIA HUMANORUM ACTUUM VII, SECT. 11
© Sydney Penner 2012
<371, col. b>2
De malitia. On evil.
Praeter alias differentias inter bonitatem, et mali- In addition to other differences between goodness and evil,3
tiam, una est, quod voluntas humana non potest one is that a human will cannot become actually good without
fieri actualiter bona sine operatione a se elicita, an operation elicited by it, as was said above, but it can
5 ut supra dictum est; potest autem fieri mala sine 5R become evil without any act by the voluntary lack of an act
ullo actu per voluntariam carentiam actus deb- that one ought to perform.4 For something voluntary of
iti; huiusmodi enim voluntarium dari potest, ut this sort can be given, as was said above in De voluntario et
supra tract. 2. disp. 1. sect. 5. dictum est, et ad involuntario disp. 1, sect. 5, and it suffices for evil on account
malitiam sufficit propter imperfectionem eius, ut of its imperfection, as is usually discussed more widely with
10 latius tradi solet 1. 2. q. 71. art. 5. et q. 72. art. 6. 10R respect to Summa theologiae (henceforth: ST ) IaIIae.71.5 and
Unde fit duplicem esse malitiam, una est quae prox- 72.6. Hence, there are two kinds of evil: one where the act is
ime denominat actum malum, et per illum, volun- proximately denominated evil and the will through it and the
tatem; altera, quae voluntati proxime inest, et illam other where evil is proximately in the will and denominates
malam denominat. Quoniam igitur hic de actibus it evil. Therefore, since in this treatise we are discussing
15 agimus, prior malitia est propria praesentis dispu- 15R acts, the former kind is proper to the present disputation
tationis, et ideo prius de illa disputabimus, et potest and so we will discuss it first. It can be called by that general
illa generali nomine vocari malitia commissionis; in name, ‘evil of commission’. Nevertheless, at the end we will
fine tamen aliquid de posteriore addemus, quando add something about the latter kind of evil, since the lack
carentia actus ex ipso actu facile cognoscatur; de of an act is easily understood according to that act itself.
20 malitia autem actus disputari possunt omnia quae 20R Moreover, everything that was said about goodness can also
de bonitate dicta sunt; tamen quia suppositis dic- be discussed concerning the evil of acts. Nevertheless, since
1Latin text by and large follows the 1628 edition, with most abbreviations expanded and spellings modernized. Punctuation kept as is. I checked the
text against the Vivès edition for significant variations, as well as in a few instances against the edition of this section printed as an appendix in the third
volume of the Corpus Hispanorum de Pace edition of De legibus. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition, C = Corpus Hispanorum de Pace edition, and V
= Vivès edition. Emendations not supported by any of these editions are enclosed in square brackets. Note that the Vivès edition does not have marginal
notes; many, though not all, of the marginal notes from the 1628 edition are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text at the head of paragraphs.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3I will follow the traditional practice of translating ‘malitia’ with ‘evil’ even though the English term presently tends to be reserved for a narrower class
of bad things than the Latin ‘malitia’ such that one might well prefer ‘badness’ as a translation.
4When reading Suárez it is important to distinguish between ‘debitum’ and ‘obligatio’; I will use ‘duty’ and constructions using ‘ought’ to translate
‘debitum’ and cognate terms and reserve ‘obligation’ for ‘obligatio’. For more on Suárez’s use of these terms, see Terence Irwin, The Development of Ethics
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), vol. 2, §437.

-- 1 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 2
tis erunt breviora, omnia comprehendam sub hac the discussions will be briefer by assuming what has already
unica disputatione, explicando prius absolute ra- been said, I will include everything in this one disputation,
tionem malitiae, postea vero de obiecto, circum- first explaining the ratio of evil without qualification, and
25 stantiis, et fine pauca tractabimus. 25R then afterwards discussing its object, circumstances, and
end in brief.
SECTIO 1. SECTION 1.
Utrum sit aliquis actus voluntatis ex se, et natura Whether there is some act of the will that is of itself and by its
sua malus etiam seclusa extrinseca prohibitione. own nature evil even apart from an extrinsic prohibition.5
Praemittuntur
quadem ad
dubitationem
praesentem.
1. Primo, quod in voluntate humana sint actus 1. First, that there are evil acts in human wills is notum Some
preliminary
points for the
present doubt
are made.
mali, per se notum est, et D. Thomas satis hoc dis- per se, and St. Thomas discusses this sufficiently in ST IaI-
putat 1. 2. q. [74] art. 2. <372> Quod autem omnes Iae.74.2.6 Moreover, that all evil acts are prohibited by some
actus mali sint prohibiti aliqua lege, saltem divina, law, at least by some divine law, is certain, since this belongs
5 est certum, quia hoc ad perfectionem spectat div- 5R to the perfection of divine providence. On the other hand, it
inae providentiae. Rursus certum est apud omnes is certain according to all the theologians that some acts are
Theologos aliquos actus esse malos solum, quia pro- evil only because they are prohibited. Yet in order to explain
hibiti sunt, tamen ad explicandum exacte rationem precisely the ratio of evil it is necessary to explain how it is
malitiae oportet in universum explicare quomodo se related to prohibition: to what extent it depends on law and,
10 habeat ad prohibitionem quantum a lege pendeat; 10R consequently, to what extent it can be intrinsic to human
et consequenter, quantum possit esse intrinseca acts. For this especially is where the whole difficulty that is
humanis actibus, quia in hoc potissimum apparet to be discussed comes up. There is, moreover, a reason for The reason for
doubting.	Dubitandi
ratio.
tota difficultas tractanda. Est autem ratio dubii, doubt, since no act of will can have evil from the force of its
quia nullus actus voluntatis potest ex vi suae en- own positive entity in the way that it can have goodness. It
15 titatis positivae habere malitiam, sicut bonitatem; 15R can, therefore, only have evil to the extent that it falls short
ergo tantum potest illam habere, in quantum deficit of a rule for will, which is law. It cannot, therefore, be under-
a regula voluntatis, quae est lex; ergo non potest in- stood as an evil act without an extrinsic law prohibiting it.
telligi actus malus sine lege extrinseca prohibente. The antecedent is supposed because evil qua evil cannot be a
Antecedens supponitur, quia malum, ut malum, specific difference and a positive being. It is confirmed: for
20 non potest esse differentia specifica, et positivum 20R the evil of an act cannot be understood without an obligation
5This section may be profitably compared with De legibus 2.6, which, although structured differently contains numerous parallel passages. Compare,
for example, n. 2 with DL 2.6.4 and 7 and n. 4 with DL 2.6.3.
6It is not entirely clear what text Suárez has in mind, since the reference in the first edition is missing the question number. One recent edition
supplies ‘71’ as the question number, but the relevance of 71.2 to the present discussion is minimal at best. The obvious candidate as far as content is
concerned would be IaIIae.18.1 but it has the disadvantage of requiring us to read the supplied article number as erroneous. I have chosen to go with
74.2 on the grounds that its content is relevant and that it matches the supplied article number. My thanks to Justin M. Anderson for suggesting 74.2
as a possibility.
3 74 ] om. AV 71 C

-- 2 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 3
ens. Confirmatur, quia non potest intelligi malitia to not perform it, just as, conversely, evil cannot be under-
actus sine obligatione non faciendi, sicut neque e stood in the absence of an act except with an obligation to
contrario intelligi potest malitia in carentia actus, perform it. But every obligation arises from an extrinsic law
nisi sit obligatio operandi; sed omnis obligatio oritur that orders or prohibits. Therefore, without this there is no
25 ex lege extrinseca praecipiente, vel prohibente; ergo 25R evil. Therefore, just as such a law is not intrinsic to the act,
sine hac nulla est malitia; ergo sicut talis lex non neither is any evil. The antecedent seems known from the
est intrinseca actui, ita neque ulla malitia. An- terms, since no one sins except by omitting that which ought
tecedens videtur ex terminis notum, quia nemo to be done or conversely [by doing that which is forbidden].
peccat nisi omittendo, quod tenetur facere, neque It can also be explained, since no one sins except by willing
30 e contrario, et potest etiam explicari, quia nemo 30R evil, but no one wills that directly, since ‘no one intends to
peccat nisi volendo malitiam; non autem vult illam act for evil’. Therefore, it is willed indirectly. Therefore, it
directe, quia nemo intendens ad malum operatur; is necessary that an obligation to avoid [performing the ac-
ergo indirecte; ergo oportet, ut intercedat obliga- tion in question] intervene, since this ‘indirectly voluntary
tio cavendi illam, quia hoc voluntarium indirectum, [action]’, morally speaking, does not exist except where some
35 moraliter loquendo, non est nisi ubi intercedit ali- 35R obligation intervenes.
qua obligatio.
1. Opinio
negans.
2. Propter haec quidam dixerunt nullum esse 2. For this reason some say that there is no act of the will The first
opinion,
denying.
actum voluntatis ita malum, quin possit esse non evil in such a way that it cannot be not evil, however much it
malus, quamvis libere, et humano modo fiat, quia is done in a free and human way. For they think that every
40 putant omnem malitiam pendere ex prohibitione ex- evil depends on an extrinsic prohibition, at least a divine
trinseca saltem divina, quam putant esse liberam, 40R one, which they think is free since it depends on the will of
quia pendet ex voluntate Dei, quae libera est in om- God, which is free with respect to all effects beyond itself. A
nibus effectibus ad extra, quorum unus est prohi- prohibition or precept is one such effect. This is basically
bitio, seu praeceptum, ita Nominales fere sentiunt, what the nominalists think: Ockham, Sent. II, q. 19, ad 3
45 Ochamus in 2. q. 19. ad 3. et 4. Gerson Alphabeto and 4, and Jean Gerson, Alphabetum divini amoris 6, letter E,
6. litt. E. et Tractatu de vita spirituali, lect. 1. et 45R and Tractatus de vita spirituali lect. 1. Jacques Almain refers
alios refert Almainus tract. 3. Moralium cap. 15. et to others in Moralia tract. 3, cap. 15. Scotus generally agrees
fere consentit Scotus in 4. dist. 26. q. 1. qui tamen in Sent. IV, dist. 26, q. 1, although he makes an exception for
excepit odium Dei; videtur etiam favere D. Thomas hatred of God. Even St. Thomas seems to favour [this view] in
50 1. 2. q. 71. art. 6. ad 4. Ubi explicans illam distinc- ST IaIIae.71.6 ad 4, where in explaining the distinction made
tionem Theologorum de actibus malis, quod quidam 50R by theologians concerning evil acts, namely, that ‘some are
sunt mali, quia <col. b> prohibiti; alii vero prohibiti, evil because they are prohibited, but others are prohibited
quia mali, dicit esse intelligendam respectu legis because they are evil’, he says that the distinction should
positivae, significans respectu aeternae, et divinae be understood with respect to positive law, indicating that
55 legis omnes esse malos, quia prohibitos; quod etiam with respect to eternal and divine law all evil acts are evil
sentit D. Bonaventura in 2. dist. 35. dub. 4. circa 55R because they are prohibited. St. Bonaventure also thinks
litteram. Favet Augustinus 2. De peccatorum meri- this in Sent. II, dist. 35, dub. 4, around the letter. Augustine
29 peccat nisi omittendo ] peccat omittendo A peccat omni omittendo V

-- 3 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 4
tis et remissione cap. 16. dicens, neque praecep- favours it in De peccatorum meritis et remissione II, cap. 16,
tum erit, si quid erit nisi iubeatur, ut non sit. Et [§23,] saying: ‘nor would that be sin, if, whatever it may
60 infra, Quomodo per divinam misericordiam dimitti- be, it were not decreed that it should not be’. And further
tur, si peccatum non est, aut quomodo per divinam 60R down: ‘How is it forgiven through divine mercy if there is no
iustitiam non prohibetur, si peccatum est. Denique sin, or how is it not prohibited through divine justice if it
lib. 22. Contra Faustum cap. 27. [peccatum] definit is sin?’ Finally, in Contra Faustum XXII, ch. 27, he defines
per hoc, quod sit contra legem; idem Ambrosius sin thus: it is contrary to law. Ambrose says the same thing
65 lib. De paradiso cap. 6. dicens. Quid est peccatum in De paradiso ch. 6, [§30,] saying: ‘what is sin except a
nisi divinae legis praevaricatio, imo videtur id do- 65R transgression of divine law?’7 Indeed, Paul seems to teach
cere Paulus ad Romanos 4. Ubi non est lex, neque the same thing in Romans 4[:15]: ‘where there is no law,
praevaricatio; et cap. 5. Peccatum non imputabatur, neither is there transgression’. And in Romans 5[:13]: ‘sin is
cum lex non esset; et ideo 1. ad Corinth. 15. Virtus, not imputed where there is no law’. And for that reason he
70 inquit, peccati lex. says in 1 Corinthians 15[:56]: ‘the power of sin is the law’.8
2. Opinio
extreme
contraria.
3. Alii vero absurdum existimant, negare 70R 3. But others think it is absurd to deny that some acts—if The second
opinion, the
extreme
contrary.
aliquos actus ita esse malos, quin habeant in- they were done freely and in a human way—are evil in such
separabilem malitiam etiam de potentia absoluta, a way that they have an evilness that is inseparable even by
si libere, et humano modo fiant, et nihilominus absolute power. Nevertheless, on account of the arguments
75 propter argumenta facta concedunt non posse esse just made, they concede that they cannot be evil without
malos sine prohibitione saltem divina; unde con- 75R at least a divine prohibition. Hence they conclude that this
cludunt hanc prohibitionem non esse Deo liberam, prohibition is not free for God but necessary. For, although
sed necessariam, quia licet Deus ad extra se ni- God wills nothing beyond himself with strict necessity, it
hil simpliciter necessario velit; tamen supposita is, nevertheless, not disagreeable that God will something
80 libera voluntate circa unum non est inconveniens, necessarily on the supposition of freely willing something
ut sit necessarium velle aliud, quia haec non est 80R else. This is not necessity strictly speaking but a necessity
necessitas simpliciter, sed ex libera suppositione; resulting from a free supposition. In this way, therefore, they
sic ergo inquiunt hoc ipso, quod Deus vult creare think that from this, that God willed to create human beings
hominem, et illum libere vult, et per rationem oper- and willed them to act freely and through reason and willed to
85 ari, et cum illo ad hoc concurrere, necessarium est, concur with them in this, it is necessary that he prohibit for
ut illi prohibeat hos actus habentes ita coniunc- 85R them those acts that have evil conjoined to them in the way
tam malitiam, tum quia facta dicta suppositione in question. For once the stated supposition has been made,
necesse est, ut habeat Deus providentiam hominis, it is necessary that God have providence over human beings,
cuius haec est pars potissima, tum etiam, quia ab- of which this prohibition is the greatest part. Also, because it
90 solute necessarium est, ut huiusmodi actus Deo is absolutely necessary that acts of this sort displease God.
displiceat; ergo necesse est, ut repugnet voluntati 90R Therefore, it is necessary that they are repugnant to his will.
7Ambrose repeats the claim in De paradiso ch. 8, §39, which is the passage that Suárez cites in De legibus II.6.7.
8Suárez provides a nearly identical list of citations with some more detail in De legibus II.6.7.
63 peccatum ] praeceptum ACV

-- 4 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 5
eius; ergo et prohiberi; nam haec duo idem sunt, Therefore, also that they are prohibited. For these two are
hanc vero opinionem sic explicatam apud nullum the same thing. But I do not find this view explained in this
scriptorem invenio. way in any writer.
95	3. Opinio
distinctione
utens.
4. Alii distinctione utuntur cum Gregorio in 2. 4. Others use a distinction following Gregory of Rimini The third
opinion,
making use of
a distinction.
dist. 34. q. 1. art. 2. Gabriel dist. 35. q. 1. art. 1. 95R in Sent. II, dist. 34, q. 1, art. 2, Gabriel in Sent. II, dist. 35,
Almainus tract. 3. cap. 16. quos sequitur Corduba q. 1, art. 1, and Almain in [Moralia] tract. 3, cap. 16. Antonio
lib. 3. Quaestionum q. 10. ad 2. hi enim auctores de Córdoba follows them in Quaestionarium theologicum III,
concedunt aliquos esse actus intrinsece omnino q. 10 ad 2. For these authors grant that there are some acts
100 malos ac necessario, etiam de potentia absoluta; that are intrinsically entirely evil and necessarily so even with
distinguunt autem du- <373> plicem legem, aliam 100R respect to absolute power. But they distinguish between two
indicantem, aliam praecipientem. Prima explicatur kinds of law, one indicative, the other prescriptive. The first
tantum per verbum indicativi modi, hoc est facien- kind is explained only through a verb in the indicative mode:
dum, vel non est faciendum; alia per verbum im- ‘this is to be done’ or ‘this is not to be done’. The other kind
105 perativi, fac hoc, vel non facies. Prima tota est in is explained through an imperative verb: ‘do this’ or ‘you will
intellectu, et non pendet a voluntate; consistit enim 105R not do this’. The first is wholly in the intellect and does not
in iudicio indicante rem ipsam prout est. Secunda depend on a will, since it consists in a judgement indicating
vero pendet a voluntate quatenus vult imponere a thing as it is. But the second depends on a will insofar
hanc, vel illam obligationem. Unde prima non pen- as it wishes to impose this or that obligation. Hence, the
110 det ex iurisdictione, vel potestate superioris, sed first does not depend on jurisdiction or on the power of a
ex re ipsa. Secunda vero requirit potestatem, et 110R superior, but on the thing itself. But the second requires
iurisdictionem; dicunt ergo omnem actum malum power and jurisdiction. These authors say, then, that every
requirere priorem legem, non autem posteriorem. evil act requires the former kind of law but not the latter.
Praedicta
distinctio
immerito
improbatur a
nonnullis.
5. Haec distinctio a nonnullis improbatur, quia 5. This distinction is rejected by some on grounds that The aforemen-
tioned
distinction is
rejected by
some without
reason.
115 improprie utitur Gregorius voce legis, proprie enim Gregory improperly uses the word ‘law’, for it does not prop-
non significat nisi imperium; si tamen res vera est, 115R erly signify except where there is authority. Nevertheless, if
non esset de voce multum contendendum, praeser- the matter itself is true, there is no need to contend much
tim, quia dictamen rectae rationis non admodum about the word, especially since a dictate of right reason is
improprie per sese dicitur habere rationem legis re- said not all that improperly to itself have the character of
120 spectu voluntatis, praesertim in voluntate, quae law with respect to the will, especially in the will which is
non est sibi regula suorum actuum, neque est 120R not the rule for itself of its acts and is not determined by its
natura sua determinata ad honestum; nam revera own nature to the fine (honestum).9 For such a dictate really
tale dictamen est regula, et mensura talis volun- is a rule and measure for such a will. To that extent, then,
tatis: non ergo adeo improprie dici potest lex re- it can, not improperly, be called a law with respect to the
125 spectu illius, neque haec significatio huius vocis will. Nor is this meaning of this word all that unusual, for
est admodum inusitata, Augustinus enim lib. 22. 125R Augustine says in Contra Faustum XXII, resp. 27, under the
Contra Faustum resp. 27. sub disiunctione dixit. break that ‘the eternal law is divine reason or the will of God’
9For Suárez on the traditional division of good into honestum, utile, and delectabile, see DM 10.2.3–29. Roughly, goods that are good for their own
sake apart from pleasure are honestum. Finding an English term with the same range is difficult.

-- 5 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 6
Lex aeterna est ratio divina, aut voluntas Dei, et and St. Thomas in the place cited above, [ST IaIIae.71.6 ad
D. Thomas loco supra citato videtur certe hoc modo 4,] certainly seems to use the name ‘law’ in this way, as is
130 uti nomine legis, ut patet ex fine illius solutionis, clear from the end of that solution, for he says that every
dicit enim omne peccatum esse malum, quia pro- 130R sin is evil because it is prohibited, and he substitutes: ‘for
hibitum, et subdit; ex hoc enim ipso, quod est inor- precisely in that it is inordinate, it is repugnant to natural
dinatum, iuri naturali repugnat; ubi non dixit, ideo law’. He does not say here that because it is repugnant to
esse inordinatum, quia iuri naturali repugnat, sed natural law, therefore it is inordinate; rather, he says the
135 e contrario, quia est inordinatum, ideo iuri natu- contrary: because it is inordinate, therefore it is repugnant
rali repugnare, quod solum est verum sumendo ius 135R to the natural law. This is only true when taking natural law
naturale pro ipso dictamine rationis, sed quidquid for the very dictate of reason. But whatever the case may be
sit de voce legis, nos loquamur de voluntate pro- concerning the word ‘law’, we are talking about a prohibiting
hibente, et de iudicio dictante. will and a dictating judgement.
140	1. Assertio. 6. Dicendum primo, aliquos actus voluntatis 6. It should be said, first, that some acts of the will are of The first
assertion.	ex se, et ex vi suorum obiectorum esse malos ante 140R themselves and their objects evil prior to any will prohibiting
omnem voluntatem prohibentem et independenter them; they are independent of that will with respect to the
Fulcitur
auctoritate.
ab illa quoad rationem malitiae. Haec conclusio aspect of evil. This conclusion is taken from St. Thomas, ST It is supported
by authority.	sumitur ex D. Thoma 1. 2. q. 100. art. 1. et 8. IaIIae.100.1 and 8. For in this sense he defines certain acts
145 hoc enim sensu definit quosdam actus ita esse as evil in such a way that God cannot give dispensation so
malos, ut nulla Dei dispensatione fieri posset, ut 145R that they would not be evil. Cajetan follows this in the same
non sint mali, et ita sequitur Caietanus ibi, et Soto place, as well as Soto in De iustitia II, q. 3, art. 10, Victoria
2. De iustitia. q. 3. art. 10. Victoria Relectione de in Relectio de homicidio, and Richard Middleton in Sent. III,
homicidio, Richardus in 3. dist. 37. art. 1. q. 5. et dist. 37, art. 1, q. 5. It is also admitted in a strict sense by
150 ibi Gabriel q. 1. art. 2. <col. b> et Scotus q. 1. Gabriel in Sent. III, dist. 37, q. 1, art. 2, and Scotus in Sent. III,
absolute hoc admittit, licet in particulari iudicio de 150R dist. 37, q. 1, although they disagree with St. Thomas in the
his actibus differat a sententia D. Thomae, quod case of a particular judgement about these acts. But that
non est huius loci; consentit etiam Durandus in is not to the point here. Durandus also agrees in Sent. I,
1. dist. 47. q. 4. Sumitur etiam ex Augustino 1. De dist. 47, q. 4. It is also taken from Augustine in De libero
155 libero arbitrio cap. 3. dicente adulterium non esse arbitrio I, cap. 3, where he says that adultery is not evil
malum, quia prohibitum, sed e contrario, et idem 155R because it is prohibited, but the other way around. He says
dicit de mendacio, Glossa Levit. 19. the same thing about lying in Quaestionum in Heptateuchum
III.68.
Probatur
inductione.
7. Unde probatur primo inductione, quia odium 7. Next it is proven, first, by induction, since hatred It is proven by
induction.	Dei ita est malum, ut si libere, et humano modo of God is an evil such that if it comes about freely, in a
160 absque ignorantia fiat, non possit non esse malum, 160R human way, and without ignorance, it cannot fail to be evil.
quod videtur ita ex terminis notum, ut non indigeat This seems so well known from the terms that it does not
probatione, nam rationi propositum statim repug- require proof, for what is proposed is immediately repugnant
nat, idem est de hoc actu, volo agere contra consci- to reason. It is the same with this act: ‘I wish to act against
154 47 ] 46 V

-- 6 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 7
entiam, contra rectam rationem, contra praeceptum conscience, against right reason, against the precept of a
165 superioris. Nam huiusmodi actus non potest mente 165R superior’. For an act of this kind cannot be conceived by the
concipi, quin malus sit, quod argumentum late mind as other than evil, which argument Almain pursues
prosequitur Almainus supra. Potest etiam haec at length in the [text cited] above. This induction can also
inductio extendi ad ipsam divinam voluntatem, re- be extended to the divine will, with respect to which certain
spectu cuius quaedam sunt ita mala, ut non possit things are evil such that God cannot will them. Willing to
170 Deus ea velle, qualia sunt velle mentiri, velle non 170R deceive, willing not to keep a promise, and so on are such
implere promissum, etc. Quod non provenit re- things. This does not result from the will prohibiting them.
spectu illius ex voluntate prohibente; ergo ex eo Therefore, it results from the fact that such willings are per
provenit quod talis voluntas per se mala est. se evil.
Probatur a
priori.
8. Ratio autem a priori est, quia voluntas sumit 8. The reason, moreover, is a priori, since a willing takes It is proven a
priori.	175 bonitatem, vel malitiam suam ex obiecto; est autem 175R up its good or evil from its object. There is, moreover, some
aliquod obiectum ex se disconveniens naturae ratio- object that is of itself disagreeable to rational nature as such
nali, ut sic, absque voluntate superioris prohiben- apart from the will of a prohibiting superior, as was discussed
tis, ut supra late dictum est; ergo talis voluntas per in detail above.10 Therefore, such a willing is per se evil from
sese est mala ex vi voluntariae tendentiae in tale the force of the voluntary tendency to such an object prior
180 obiectum ante voluntatem prohibentem. Confir- 180R to any prohibiting will. It is confirmed and shown, first, The first
confirmation.	Confirmatur 1. matur, et declaratur primo, quia in caeteris rebus, because in the other things and natures, some are by their
et naturis, quaedam sunt natura sua disconvenien- nature disagreeable with the natures of things before any
tia naturis rerum ante omnem voluntatem, ut calor willing, as heat of itself is disagreeable to water. Similarly
ex se est disconveniens aquae, similiter in aliis ra- with other aspects of good and evil, for example, the aspects
185 tionibus boni, et mali, verbi gratia, delectabilis, aut 185R of delightful and saddening things, each one is of itself such
contristantis unumquodque est ex se tale natura by its nature without reference to an extrinsic will. Therefore,
sua sine respectu ad voluntatem extrinsecam; ergo the same would be the case in rational nature as such and
idem esse poterit in natura rationali ut sic, et in ra- in the aspect of the fine or of the contrary evil. Finally, since The second
confirmation.	Confirmatur 2. tione boni honesti, aut mali contrarii. Tandem, quia just as in speculative matters some things are principles nota
190 sicut in speculativis quaedam sunt principia per se 190R per se, which do not depend on extrinsic things to be true,
nota, quae non pendent ab extrinseco ut vera sint, so also in practical matters, of that kind are either these
ita etiam in practicis, qualia sunt, vel illa generalia, general principles—‘what is fine should be done’, ‘what is
honestum est faciendum, turpe vitandum; vel par- base should be avoided’—or these particular principles—‘one
ticularia, non est mentiendum, nemini est facienda should not lie’, ‘one should give injury to no one’, and so on.
195 iniuria, etc. Haec ergo iudicia semper sunt vera 195R These judgements, therefore, are always true independently
independenter ab omni extrinseco; ergo et voluntas of everything extrinsic. Therefore, it is also the case that
ab illis discordans semper est mala independenter a will discordant with them is always evil independently of
10DBM 2.1?
177 voluntate ] voluntatis V
188 natura ] naturali V

-- 7 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 8
etiam ab omni extrinseco. Nam illa veritas sumi- everything extrinsic. For that truth is taken in its way from
tur suo modo ex [conformitate] <374> ad [appeti- conformity to appetite that is right or not right. Hence, if
200 tum] rectum, vel non rectum; unde si fingeremus 200R we imagine a human being invincibly ignorant of God and of
hominem invincibiliter ignorantem Deum et omnem every superior will prohibiting lying or adultery, but rightly
superiorem voluntatem prohibentem mendacium, using his natural judgement in matters of action, we would
vel adulterium, recte autem utentem naturali iu- understand him to be able to act well or badly, and in such a
dicio in rebus agendis, intelligeremus illum posse human being evil would be inseparable from willings to lie or
205 bene, vel male agere; et a voluntate mentiendi, vel 205R to commit adultery.
adulterandi in tali homine esse inseparabilem mali-
tiam.
2. Assertio. 9. Dicendum secundo, nullum posse esse vol- 9. It should be said, second, that no act of the will can be The second
assertion.	untatis actum malum, quin sit contra dictamen ra- evil without it being contrary to a dictate of reason judging
210 tionis iudicantis malitiam actus, vel obiecti, qui est the evil of an act or its object. This is the sense of the
sensus auctorum tertiae sententiae, et per se con- authors of the third view and it is obvious of itself. For an
stat, quia non potest actus voluntatis esse malus, 210R act of the will cannot be evil unless the evil is in some way
quin sit illi voluntaria aliquo modo malitia, non erit voluntary for it. But it will not be voluntary unless it is in
autem voluntaria nisi sit aliquo modo ratione diiu- some way adjudicated by reason, either in the act itself or in
215 dicata, vel in actu ipso, vel in obiecto, quod perinde the object that is equally [evil]. I will not discuss now whether
est; nec disputo modo, an hoc dictamen debeat, et this dictate must and can be had, for that was satisfactorily
possit haberi, nam de hoc satis dictum est supra 215R discussed above in De voluntario et involuntario 4.3.
in materia de voluntario, disp. 4. sect. 3.
1. Corollarium
odium Dei fore
malum, [etsi]
non
prohiberetur.
10. Atque ex his sequitur primo quid sit iudi- 10. And from these assertions it follows, first, what The first
corollary:
hatred of God
would be evil,
even if it were
not prohibited.
220 candum de hac conditionali, si Deus non prohiberet should be judged regarding the conditional ‘if God did not
odium sui, non esset malum; quidam enim dicunt prohibit hatred of himself, it would not be evil’.
utrumque sequi, nam et esset malum, quia esset For some authors say that both things follow, for it would
de turpi obiecto, et non esset malum, quia non es- 220R both be evil because it would be about a base object and it
set prohibitum a Deo, ita respondet Medina 1. 2. would not be evil because it is not prohibited by God. Med-
225 q. 81. art. 1. et q. 19. in principio, et q. 100. art. 8. ina responds in that way in ST IaIIae.81.1, IaIIae.19 in the
Id probatur
quando non
daretur
prohibitio
proprie dicta.
tamen si sit sermo de prohibitione non ut spectat beginning, and IaIIae.100.8. Nevertheless, if the discussion The corollary
is proven in
the case where
there is no
prohibition
properly
speaking.
ad naturale iudicium, sed ad voluntatem divinam, is about prohibition not as it relates to natural judgement
qua ut superior vult obligare hominem, ut hoc fa- 225R but as it relates to the divine will by which God as superior
ciat, vel non faciat, dicendum est conditionalem wills to obligate human beings either to do this or not to do
230 hanc esse veram, licet Deus non prohiberet, actus it, one should say that the conditional ‘the act would be evil,
esset malus, et aliam partem omnino esse falsam, even though God did not prohibit it’ is true. The other part is
neque sequi contradictionem, quia obiectum ip- entirely false and so no contradiction follows. For the object
199 conformitate ] confirmatione ACV (cf. DBM 12.2.2)
199–200 appetitum ] oppositum ACV (cf. DBM 12.2.2)
219 Marginal note: etsi ] esto ACV

-- 8 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 9
sum per se sufficit ut actus sit malus; illud autem 230R is of itself sufficient so that the act is evil, something that is
non mutatur etiamsi tollatur prohibitio. Deinde not changed even if the prohibition is removed.
235 illud antecedens non est ideo impossibile, ut im- Next, that antecedent is not impossible on grounds that
plicet contradictionem; non est ergo impossibile, it implies a contradiction. It is not, therefore, impossible,
ut ex illo sequantur contradictoria. Antecedens because contradictories follow from it. The antecedent is
imprimis patet; si intercedat ignorantia talis pro- 235R especially obvious when ignorance of such a prohibition in-
hibitionis, ut supra in exemplo positum est, nam tervenes, as in the example posited above, for it is the same
240 respectu ignorantiae perinde est, ac si in re non with respect to ignorance as if it were not prohibited in reality.
esset prohibitio. Deinde patet ex re ipsa, quia vol- Next, it is obvious from the matter itself, since the willing
untas, qua Deus hoc prohibet, vel intelligitur esse by which God prohibits this is either understood to be a cer-
naturalis quaedam displicentia talis obiecti, vel ac- 240R tain natural displeasure with such an object or with such an
tus; et haec in primis supponit malitiam iam in act.11 But this, in the first place, already presupposes evil
245 actu, vel obiecto; ergo si per possibile, vel impos- in the act or object, so that, if we per possibile or impossibile
sibile <col. b> praescindamus hanc displicentiam, cut out this displeasure so that it doesn’t exist, there will be
ut non sit, erit in tali actu malitia, et deinde non evil in such an act. Furthermore, it is not obvious that God
constat Deum ex necessitate habere naturalem dis- 245R has such a natural displeasure of necessity, at least with
plicentiam, saltem quoad exercitium, quia nihil respect to exercise, since there is nothing that necessitates
250 est, quod necessitet ad hoc divinam voluntatem. the divine will to this [displeasure].
Denique ille simplex affectus, ut sic, per se non Finally, that simple affect as such does not of itself suffice
sufficit ad rationem legis prohibentis, sicut neque e for the character of a prohibiting law, just as conversely
contrario simplex affectus complacentiae in bonum 250R a simple affect of pleasure for a good does not suffice for
non sufficit ad rationem legis praecipientis, ut patet a prescribing law, as is clear in the case of acts of giving
255 in actibus consiliorum; est ergo necessaria aliqua counsel. Some efficacious willing is, therefore, necessary,
voluntas efficax, non qua Deus velit talem actum not one by which God wishes a certain act not to be but one
non fieri, sed qua velit teneri inferiorem ad talem by which he wishes to bind an inferior to not performing
actum non faciendum; haec autem voluntas nulla 255R such an act. But this willing cannot by any argument be
ratione probari potest convenire Deo necessario proven necessarily to accompany God even if willing to create
260 etiam supposita voluntate creandi hominem, nam human beings is assumed. For, although it is fitting for
licet sit consentaneum divinae sapientiae et prov- divine wisdom and providence to govern rational creatures by
identiae gubernare creaturam rationalem, leges, imposing laws and precepts on them through his will, this is
et praecepta ei imponendo per voluntatem suam; 260R not, nevertheless, necessary such that the contrary implies a
tamen non est ita hoc necessarium, ut contrarium contradiction. Just as it is also fitting that he render rewards
265 implicet contradictionem; sicut etiam est consenta- for good acts and penalties for evil acts, and yet God could
neum, ut retribuat praemia pro bonis actibus, et without contradiction refuse to punish such evil acts. In
poenas pro malis, et tamen sine contradictione po- the same way, therefore, he could also leave human beings
11The structure in this section is not entirely perspicuous, especially with respect to the occurrences of ‘vel’ in this sentence.
250 ille ] illi V

-- 9 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 10
tuisset Deus nolle punire talem actum malum; sic 265R to be ruled by their reason without imposing any special
ergo posset etiam hominem relinquere, ut sua ra- obligation on them through his will. For the latter is also a
270 tione regeretur nullam specialem obligationem per certain moral effect beyond himself which does not have a
voluntatem suam illi imponendo, nam hic etiam est necessary connection with the other effect nor with the divine
quidam moralis effectus ad extra, qui non habet will. In this sense, therefore, that conditional involves no
necessariam connexionem cum alio effectu, neque 270R contradiction. Rather, the affirmative part is true, namely,
cum voluntate divina. In hoc ergo sensu nullam ‘such an act would be evil even though there were no external
275 involuit contradictionem illa conditionalis; sed vera prohibition’.
est pars affirmativa, quod licet nulla esset externa
prohibitio talis actus esset malus.
Quid quando
talis prohibitio
non extaret,
sed solum
dictamen
rationis.
11. Alio vero sensu potest intelligi de dictamine 11. But the prohibition can be understood in another What the case
is when such
a prohibition
does not exist,
but only a
dictate of
reason.
rationis divinae, vel humanae, et hoc modo per sense as a dictate of divine or human reason, and in this
280 locum intrinsecum sequitur, si talis actus non iudi- 275R way the prohibition follows per locum intrinsecum. If such
caretur malus recta ratione non futurum malum, an act were not judged evil by right reason it would not be
quia non potest esse malum aliquod in actu, nisi evil, since it cannot be something evil in act unless it is
sit voluntarium: non potest autem esse voluntar- voluntary but it cannot be voluntary unless it was in some
ium, nisi aliquo modo sit recta ratione iudicatum, way judged by right reason. And since our reason is a kind of
285 et quia nostra ratio est quaedam participatio rectae 280R participation in right reason, which is in God, for that reason
rationis, quae in Deo est, ideo etiam recte sequitur, it also rightly follows that if in God there were no eternal law
si in Deo non esset aeterna lex indicans malitiam indicating the evil of acts to which our will was repugnant,
actuum, cui voluntas nostra repugnaret, non posse there could not be any evil in our acts, since our reason is
in actibus nostris esse malitiam, quia ablata divina necessarily removed by the removing of divine reason. But
290 ratione, necesse est nostram auferri: Si autem sub 285R if along with the conditional we imagine that a dictate of
conditionali fingamus manere in nobis dictamen right reason indicating the evil remains in us even though,
rectae rationis indicans malum, et per impossibile per impossibile, it is not in God, that would suffice for evil
non esse in Deo, illud sufficeret ad malitiam, quia because that suffices for the will to tend voluntarily to a base
illud sufficit <375> ut voluntas voluntarie tendat object.
295 in turpe obiectum.
2. Corollarium
circa illam
causalem,
omnis actus
est malus quia
prohibitus, vt
sit, aut non sit
vera.
12. Secundo intelligitur ex dictis, quid dicen- 290R 12. From what was said, it is understood, second, what The second
corollary
concerning
whether the
causal
[statement]
‘every act is
evil because it
is prohibited’
is true or not.
dum sit de hac causali locutione, Omnis actus should be said about the causal statement ‘every act of the
voluntatis est malus, quia prohibitus saltem lege will is evil because it is prohibited at least by eternal law’. For
aeterna; nam si intelligatur de lege proprie impo- if it is understood of a law properly imposing an obligation
300 nente obligationem per voluntatem legislatoris, non through the will of a legislator, it is not strictly necessary
est simpliciter necessaria de potentia absoluta, ut 295R with respect to absolute power, as is clear from what was
ex dictis patet, nec de facto etiam est vera, si in- said. Nor is it even true in fact, if it is understood to be
telligatur de prima radice, et causa malitiae, ut about the first root and cause of evil, as is also clear from
282 malum aliquod ] malum autem aliquod CV
297 de hac causali ] de causa causali CV

-- 10 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 11
etiam patet ex dictis; potest autem de facto ver- what was said. Moreover, what was understood about the
305 ificari intellecta de causa sufficienti ad malitiam, sufficient cause for evil—namely, a dictate of the intellect or
nempe dictamine intellectus, seu lege aeterna, nam 300R the eternal law—can be verified as being the case in fact. For
licet, nulla alia esset, haec satis esset, ut volun- even though there were nothing else, this would be enough so
tas nostra agens contra illam legem esset mala, that our will would be evil in acting contrary to that law. And
et hoc modo possent intelligi quaedam testimonia the kind of testimony of Augustine, Ambrose, and St. Thomas
310 Augustini, Ambrosii, et D. Thomae supra adducta that was brought up in n. 2 can be understood in this way.
in n. 2. nam de facto ita est, quod omnis actus 305R For it is in fact the case that every evil act is contrary to the
malus est contra legem Dei, et per illam tanquam law of God, and [is evil] through that as through a sufficient
per sufficientem rationem, et clariorem notificatur; reason and it is made more clearly known.
si vero intelligatur solum de lege dictante prout est But if it is understood as only about a law that dictates
315 in ratione, facilius verificaretur propositio de inesse, insofar as it is in reason, the proposition can be more easily
quam causalis, est enim voluntas mala agens con- 310R verified as assertoric rather than causal, for it is an evil
tra dictamen rationis; tamen non ita proprie dici will acting against the dictate of reason. Nevertheless, it
mala videtur, quia agat contra dictamen rationis, does not thus seem properly to be called evil because it acts
sed quia voluntarie tendit in malum obiectum, quod against a dictate of reason but because it voluntarily tends
320 non est malum, quia ratione ostenditur, sed potius to an evil object, and the object is not evil because it is
ideo ratione ostenditur quia ipsum malum est, ut 315R [so] shown by reason, but rather it is [so] shown by reason
in principio huius materiae dicebam; potest autem because it is itself evil, as I was saying in the beginning of
aliquo modo verificari illa causalitas. Primo lo- this discussion. That causality, however, can be verified in
quendo de ratione divina in quantum est prima another way. First, by speaking about divine reason insofar
325 mensura, et primum exemplar rerum omnium, de as it is the first measure and first exemplar of all things, but
ratione autem nostra, in quantum est necessaria 320R about our reason insofar as it is a necessary condition and
conditio, et consequenter aliquo modo causa om- consequently in some sense a cause of every act of our wills.
nium actuum voluntatis; de utraque vero proprie But in each case [the causality] is properly on the part of the
ex parte obiecti, non ex parte actuum intellectus, object and not on the part of the acts of the intellect. For
330 est enim voluntas mala, quia discordat ab obiecto, a will is evil because it is in discord with the object as the
prout per rectam rationem proponitur. 325R object is proposed through right reason.
3. Corollarium
quo sensu
dicantur aliqui
actus
intrinsece
mali.
13. Tertio intelligitur ex dictis, quomodo di- 13. Third, it is understood from what was said in what The third
corollary
about the
sense in which
some acts are
called
intrinsically
evil.
cantur aliqui actus intrinsece mali, non enim tales way some acts are called intrinsically evil. For the acts are
sunt, quia malitia sit intrinseca, et physica entitas not such because evil is a physical entity intrinsic to them
335 eorum de quo postea in sect. 3. neque etiam for- (about this later in sect. 3), nor perhaps because the physical
tasse, quia non possit entitas physica actus poni 330R entity of the act could not be placed in rerum natura without
in rerum natura, sine illa malitia, sed dicuntur that evil. Rather, they are called such because they cannot
tales, quia non possunt libere, et humano modo be freely and in a human way performed morally directed
fieri circa tale obiectum moraliter, et abs- <col. b> at such an object and without ignorance of the proposed
340 que ignorantia propositum, quin habeant coniunc- object without having a conjoined and innate evil. And so it
314 dictante ] distante V

-- 11 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 12
tam, et innatam malitiam, itaque repugnat tales 335R is repugnant for such acts performed in that way to be good
actus morales sic factos esse bonos, aut manere in- or to remain indifferent. For that reason they are deservedly
differentes, et ideo merito dicuntur mali intrinsece. called intrinsically evil.
Interest inter
actus
intrinsece
malos.
Sed inter hos est advertenda quaedam varietas, et But a certain difference and latitude should be noticed There is a
difference
among
intrinsically
evil acts.
345 latitudo, nam quidam habent adiunctam malitiam among these acts, for some of them have evil conjoined to
ex vi directae, et physicae tendentiae in obiectum, 340R them by the force of a direct and physical tendency to the
quod contingit quando vel obiectum habet omnino object, which happens either when the object has that condi-
immutabilem conditionem illam ex qua oritur turpi- tion entirely unchangeably from which the wickedness arises
tudo, ut est in odio Dei, aut quando in ipso obiecto (this is the case with hatred of God) or when in the object
350 directe volito proponitur illa conditio, ex qua oritur itself directly willed that condition from which that wicked-
illa turpitudo, ut est in voluntate mentiendi, fu- 345R ness arises is proposed (as in the case of willing to lie, to
randi, etc. Aliquando vero non adiungitur malitia steal, and so on). But sometimes the evil is not conjoined by
ex vi directae vel physicae tendentiae, sed tantum the force of a direct and physical tendency but only from an
ex indirecta: ut cum aliquis vult hanc rem accipere, indirect tendency, as when someone wishes to accept this
355 vel ad hanc mulierem accedere, et in obiecto volito thing or to come near to this woman but does not place either
non ponit conditionem non suae, vel alienae; in- 350R his condition or that of another in the willed object. There
ter quos est differentia; nam hic posterior actus is a difference between these two types, for this latter act
potest conservari totus sine malitia, si in obiecto can be entirely preserved without evil if the condition in the
mutetur conditio, quia ex illa mutatione in obiecto object were to change. For from that change in the object
360 non sequitur mutatio in actu, quia non tendebat no change in the act follows, since it did not tend directly
directe in illam conditionem: potest autem sequi 355R to that condition. But a moral change can follow, since the
mutatio moralis, quia moraliter mutatur obiectum; object is morally changed. But in the former kind of act the
in alio vero actu non potest mutari obiectum, quin object cannot be changed without the act being changed on
mutetur actus propter directam tendentiam, et ideo account of the direct tendency. And for this reason the evil
365 non potest eo manente auferri malitia, nisi forte cannot be removed as long as the tendency remains, except
interveniente ignorantia; si tamen tam patens sit 360R perhaps by the intervention of ignorance. Nevertheless, if
malitia, ut non possit ignorari, ut fortasse est in the evil is so obvious that one cannot be ignorant of it, as
odio Dei, non poterit ille actus esse humanus, quin is perhaps the case with the hatred of God, that act could
sit malus; et ideo forte Scotus dixit hunc actum not be a human act without being evil. Perhaps it is for that
370 esse specialiter intrinsece malum, de quo nonnulla reason that Scotus said that this act is especially intrinsically
in sect. 3. 365R evil (some more about this in sect. 3).
Ad rationem
dubitandi in
n. 1.
14. Ultimo patet ex dictis responsio ad rationem 14. Lastly, the response to the reason for doubting The response
to the reason
for doubting in
n. 1.
dubitandi in principio positam; cum enim dicitur, posited in the beginning is clear from what has been said.
omne malum debere esse contra prohibitionem, vel For when it is said that every evil must be contrary to a pro-
375 contra debitum, si intelligatur de intrinseco deb- hibition or contrary to a duty, if this is understood as being
ito naturae rationali, ut sic, est verum quod as- 370R about the duty intrinsic to a rational nature as such, what
sumitur, et ex illo debito nascitur iudicium rectae is assumed is true. From that duty arises a judgement of
rationis, prohibens iudicando convenientiam natu- right reason that prohibits by judging agreeability to nature

-- 12 of 13 --

Suárez, DBM VII, sect. 1 13
rae, et malitiam contrariam, non imponendo novam and the contrary evil. It does not prohibit by imposing a new
380 obligationem; et hoc satis est ad omnia, quae ibi obligation. And this is sufficient for everything assumed here
assumuntur, neque est necessaria alia maior pro- 375R nor is any greater external prohibition necessary, as was said,
hibitio exterior, ut dictum est, quamvis de facto although as a matter of fact this external prohibition always
semper haec concurrat ex perfectione divinae prov- concurs as a result of the perfection of divine providence.
identiae. Ad testimonia iam responsum est in n. 4. There was already a response in n. 4 to the cited texts and
385 et possunt etiam non male exponi de lege indicante. they can also be not badly explained as being about indicative
380R law.

-- 13 of 13 --
