Last revision: June 18, 2018	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE BONITATE ET MALITIA HUMANORUM ACTUUM, DISP. 6, SECT. 41
© Sydney Penner 2018
<365, col. b>2
Quid sit bonitas accidentalis ex fine in actu interiori What the accidental goodness from the end in an interior act
voluntatis. of the will is.
1. Opinio in
hac
quaestione.
1. Duo possunt esse modi dicendi. Prior est hanc 1. There can be two ways of speaking. The first one is The first
opinion on
this question.
bonitatem esse rem aliquam, vel realem modum in- that this good is some thing or real mode intrinsically su-
5 trinsece superadditum actui bono ex obiecto, ratione 5R peradded to a good act from its object, by reason of which
cuius tendit in finem. Cui sententiae favere videtur it tends to the end. St. Thomas appears to favour this
D. Thomas 1. 2. q. 18. art. 4. ad 2. dicens, quod view in ST IaIIae.18.4 ad 2, saying that although the end
licet finis sit <366> causa extrinseca, tamen relatio is an extrinsic cause, the relation to the end, nonetheless,
Suadetur 1. in finem inhaeret actioni, et potest suaderi primo, inheres in the action. [This view] can be argued for, first, First
argument.	10 Quia actus voluntatis sic bonus, vere, ac proprie 10R because an act of the will is good in such a way that it
est propter finem illum, a quo sumit hanc bonitatem; truly and properly is for the sake of that end from which it
ergo revera tendit in illum; ergo ab illo accipit aliquem takes up this goodness. Therefore, it really tends to that
modum, vel specificationem intrinsecam, et realem end. Therefore, it receives some real and intrinsic mode or
respectu cuius ille finis se habet, ut ratio formalis specification from it, as a result of which it is related to that
15	Secundo. specificans. Secundo, quia omnis bonitas volun- 15R end as to a formal specifying ratio. Second, because every Second.
tatis oportet, ut sit aliquid reale, alioqui vel nihil goodness of the will requires [that] in order to be something
erit, nisi denominatio extrinseca, vel relatio ratio- real. Otherwise it would be nothing other than an extrinsic
nis: haec autem non possunt habere rationem for- denomination or a relation of reason. But these cannot
malis bonitatis, quia per haec non efficimur boni, have the formal ratio of goodness, since we do not bring
20 sed realibus actibus, quibus aliquid volumus. Et 20R about good things through these but by real acts by which
Confirmatur. confirmatur, nam si haec bonitas solum esset denom- we will something. It is confirmed: for if this goodness were It is confirmed.
inatio quaedam, nihil magis referret ad virtutem, vel only a kind of denomination, it would no more relate to
meritum, quam bonitas exterioris actus; hoc autem virtue or merit than the goodness of an exterior act would.
videtur esse contra rationem bonitatis interioris vol- But this seems to be contrary to the ratio of the goodness
25 untatis, quia bonitas voluntatis debet esse intrinseca, 25R of an interior act, since the goodness of the will must be
et in hoc differt ab aliis exterioribus actibus. Ter- intrinsic, and it differs in this from other, exterior acts.
1Latin text by and large follows the 1628 edition, with most abbreviations expanded and spellings modernized. Punctuation kept as is. I checked the
text against the Vivès edition for significant variations. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition. Emendations not supported by
either of these editions are enclosed in square brackets. Note that the Vivès edition does not have marginal notes; many, though not all, of the marginal
notes from the 1628 edition are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text at the head of paragraphs.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 2
Tertio. tio; nam si haec bonitas est denominatio, peto a quo Third: for if this goodness is a denomination, I ask from Third.
actu sumenda sit; aut enim ab intentione ipsius finis, what act it is taken. It might be [i] from the intention for
et hoc non, alioqui eadem ratione dicendum esset the end itself. But not from this. Otherwise, it should
30 omnem electionem esse bonam tantum per denom- 30R for the same reason be said that every choice is good only
inationem extrinsecam ab intentione finis, quia ab through an extrinsic denomination from the intention for
illa manat, et imperatur eodem modo; aut ab actu the end, because it flows from that and is commanded in
imperante, qui respiciat directe actum imperatum in- the same way. Or it might be [ii] from a commanded act that
teriorem, et obiectum. Et hoc etiam non videtur dici directly respects the commanded interior act and object.
35 posse, alias numquam haec bonitas ex fine reperire- 35R But it seems that this cannot be said either. Otherwise this
tur in actu voluntatis, nisi quando voluntas reflec- goodness from an end would never be found in an act of will
titur per unum actum supra alium, quod videtur except when the will through one act reflects on another
falsum; nam si quis velit dare eleemosynam propter act. That seems false. For if someone wishes to give alms
satisfactionem, ibi bonitas est accidentalis ex fine, et in order to make satisfaction, the goodness in this case is
40 tamen nulla est reflexio actus interioris supra alium, 40R accidental from the end and yet there is no reflection of one
sed tendentia directa in exteriorem actum. interior act over another but a direct tending to an exterior
act.
2. Opinio
verior.
2. Secundus modus dicendi est actum interi- 2. The second way of speaking is that an interior act of The second,
truer, opinion.	orem voluntatis solum dici bonum ab extrinseco fine the will is called good from an extrinsic end only through
per denominationem extrinsecam ab alio actu eius- 45R an extrinsic denomination from some other act of the same
45 dem voluntatis, a quo aliquo modo imperatur; loquor will by which it is in some way commanded. Moreover, I am
autem de actu alias bono ex obiecto, nam solum speaking about an act otherwise good from its object, for
respectu illius est proprie hic finis extrinsecus, et only with respect to it is this end properly extrinsic and the
bonitas ex illo sumpta accidentalis est. Haec senten- goodness taken from it accidental. This view seems truer
tia mihi verior videtur, quam indicavit Caietanus 2. 2. 50R to me. Cajetan declares this view in ST IIaIIae.44.4, saying
50 q. 44. art. 4. dicens hanc bonitatem esse extrinsecum that this goodness is an extrinsic mode of the act. It can
modum actus; sumitur etiam ex eodem Caietano 1. 2. also be taken from the first three articles of IaIIae.20 in the
q. 20. tribus primis articulis iuncta doctrina eiusdem same work in conjunction with the teaching in IaIIae.18.6.
in 1. 2. q. 18. art. 6. nam ibi dicit omnem bonitatem For there he says that all goodness from an end is per se
ex fine per se primo esse in interiori actu, in exteri- 55R first in the interior act, but in the exterior act through a
55 ori vero per denominationem ab illo; hic autem dicit denomination from the interior act. But in the latter place
<col. b> actus imperatos a voluntate, ut sic, quoad he says that acts commanded by the will, as such, with
hoc numerandos esse inter actus exteriores, quamvis respect to this should be numbered among the exterior acts,
alioqui sint eliciti, potest etiam haec sententia sumi although in another way they are elicited. This view can
ex eodem D. Thoma 1. 2. q. 13. art. 1. Clarius ex q. 60R also be taken from St. Thomas, ST IaIIae.13.1, and more
60 2. De malo art. 4. ad 9. Item ex omnibus locis, in clearly from De malo q. 2, art. 4, ad 9. The same thing [can
quibus docet huiusmodi finem non esse obiectum, be gathered] in all the places in which he teaches that an
36 actu ] actus V.
49 2. 2. ] 1. 2. V.

-- 2 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 3
sed circumstantiam etiam respectu interioris actus end of this kind is not the object but the circumstance even
voluntatis. with respect to the interior act of the will.
Eius 1. ratio
a priori.
3. Atque hinc sumi potest ratio a priori huius sen- 65R 3. And an a priori argument for this view can be taken The first,
a priori,
argument for
this view.
65 tentiae, quia huiusmodi finis nullo modo est obiec- from here, since an end of this kind is in no way the object—
tum nec materiale, nec formale illius actus, qui de- neither material nor formal—of the act that is accidentally
nominatur accidentaliter bonus ex tali fine; ergo in denominated good from such an end. Therefore, there is
illo actu nulla est intrinseca tendentia, vel habitudo no intrinsic tendency or disposition to such an end in that
ad talem finem. Patet consequentia; quia interior 70R act. The consequence is clear, because an interior act only
70 actus solum habet intrinsecam habitudinem, et ten- has an intrinsic disposition and tendency to the object. [It
dentiam ad obiectum; item quia si hoc modo tenderet is clear] also because if it were to tend to that end in this
in illum finem, esset volendo illum, vel propter il- way, it would be by willing it or [by willing something] for
lum tanquam ad rationem obiectivam: si ergo ille the sake of it as an objective ratio. Therefore, if that end
finis non est obiectum, neque in actu esse potest 75R is not the object, then there also cannot be an intrinsic
75 intrinseca tendentia in illum: ergo bonitas illa ex fine tendency to it in the act. Therefore, that goodness from the
non potest esse aliquid intrinsecum in tali actu, quia end cannot be something intrinsic in such an act, because
necessario dicere deberet habitudinem, et tenden- it would necessarily express a disposition or tendency to
tiam in illum finem. Superest probandum primum that end.
antecedens, quod primo declaratur exemplo. Nam 80R What remains is to prove the first antecedent. This
80 quando aliquis vult amare Deum propter meritum; is shown first by example. For when someone wills to
licet illa voluntas prior habeat pro obiecto amorem love God for the sake of merit, even though the willing
Dei, tamen ipse amor, qui ex vi illius exercetur, solum first has for its object love for God, that love, nevertheless,
habet Deum pro materiali obiecto, quia solum Dei which is exercised from the force of that [willing], only
amor est: similiter, quamvis bonitas meriti ut sic, sit 85R has God for its material object, since the love is only for
85 formalis ratio obiectiva prioris voluntatis, non tamen God. Likewise, although the goodness of merit as such
ipsius amoris Dei; nam si est verus amor charitatis, is the formal objective ratio of the former willing, it is not,
solum amat Deum propter bonitatem ipsius: ergo however, [the object] of that love for God. For if it is true
respectu huius actus ille finis non se habet ut obiec- charity love, it only loves God for the sake of his goodness.
tum, sed ut causa movens remote, ut significavit D. 90R Therefore, that end is not related to this act as its object
90 Thomas 1. 2. q. 18. art. 4. Ratio autem est, quia unus but as a remote moving cause, as St. Thomas indicates
actus unum tantum habet materiale obiectum, et for- in ST IaIIae.18.4. The reason is because one act only has
male; quando ergo hoc est intrinsecum, totum id, one material and formal object. Therefore, when this is
quod extrinsecum est, non habet rationem formalis intrinsic, that whole, which is extrinsic, does not have the
obiecti. 95R formal ratio of object.
95	2. Ratio, seu
dilemma.
4. Secunda principalis ratio confici posset ex 4. The second principal argument can be made from The second
argument, or
dilemma.
longo discursu supra posito disp. 4. sect. 3. de spec- the long discussion placed above in disp. 4, sect. 3, about
ificatione ex obiecto, et de pura electione, quia id, specification by the object and about pure choice. For that
quod dicitur intrinsece addi actui ex fine, non potest which is said to be intrinsically added to the act from the
86 ipsius ] om. V.

-- 3 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 4
esse partialis entilas, nec modus realis intrinsece 100R end cannot be a partial entity nor a real mode intrinsically
100	Eius prior
excluditur.
illi inhaerens. Primum constat ex rationibus supra inhering in it. The first is clear from the arguments given The first part
is ruled out.	factis, quae hic breviter urgeri possunt. Nam si ibi above, which can be pressed briefly here. For if there are
sunt duae entitates. Una est, verbi gratia poeniten- two entities here—for example, one is penitence and the
tiae; alia est misericordiae elicientis, quia suppono other is eliciting mercy, since I assume that the object and
obiectum, et finem ad virtutes diver- <367> sas per- 105R the end belong to different virtues—then there will not be
105 tinere; ergo non erunt duae partiales entitates, sed two partial entities but two distinct acts. For why or in what
duo actus distincti. Cur enim, aut in quo unirentur? would they be united? Or why would they not generate one
aut cur non generarent unum habitum similiter com- habit likewise composed of two virtues? Also, in reality the
positum ex duplici virtute? Item revera illa entitas, entity that would be specified by the end of penitence would
quae specificaretur ex fine poenitentiae, non esset 110R not be commanded but would be elicited by the virtue of
110 imperata, sed elicita a virtute poenitentiae; esset ergo penitence. Therefore, that act would be elicited by two
ille actus elicitus a duplici virtute secundum partes virtues according to different parts, which is all absurd.
diversas, quae omnia absurda sunt.
Posterior pars
excluditur
etiam. Primo.
5. Altera vero pars de modo intrinseco, facile 5. But the other part about the intrinsic mode is also The latter part
is also ruled
out. First.
etiam excluditur ratione proxime facta, et quia si easily ruled out by the argument just made and also be-
115 daretur talis modus, ille haberet propriam speciem 115R cuase, if there were such a mode, it would have a proper
a fine, quem respiceret ut obiectum proprium, fi- species from the end that it respects as its proper object.
nis autem, qui ita habet rationem obiecti, est per se But an end that in that way has the ratio of a proper object
sufficiens ad constituendum proprium actum distinc- is per se sufficient for constituting a proper act distinct
tum ab omni alio; numquam ergo dat accidentalem from all others. Therefore, it would never give an accidental
120	Secundo. modum alteri actui. Quod ita potest etiam intelligi, 120R mode to another act. This can also be understood in the Second.
quia si ille esset modus intrinsecus accidentalisque following way, because if it were an intrinsic and accidental
actus, supponeret substantiam eius, et superveniret mode of the act, it would assume the substance of the act
illi; hoc autem esse non potest respectu finis, quia and supervene on it. But this cannot be the case with
omnis tendentia intrinseca voluntatis in finem est respect to the end, because every intrinsic tendency of the
125	Tertio. prior quocumque actu imperato ex tali fine. Ultimo 125R will to the end is prior to any act commanded as a result
est apud me sufficiens ratio, quia haec denomina- of such an end. The last is a sufficient argument for me, Third.
tio sufficit ad omnia quae possunt convenire huic because this denomination suffices for everything that can
actui; et ex vi imperii voluntatis, ut sic, nihil aliud apply to this act. And from the force of the command of
necessario additur actui imperato praeter substan- the will, as such, nothing else is necessarily added to the
130 tiam eius, quam habet ex propria facultate, et obiecto 130R commanded act beyond its substance, which it has from
eius; ergo nihil aliud fingendum est, neque est nec- its proper faculty and object. Therefore, nothing else is
essarium. Maior patet, quia hoc ipso quod intellig- necessary or can be imagined. The major is clear, because
itur actus ex obiecto bonus, et imperatus ab alio by the fact that it is understood that the act is good from
etiam bono tendente in bonum finem extrinsecum, its object and is commanded by another [act] also good
135 et ordinante actum imperatum in illum, intelligitur 135R that is tending to a good extrinsic end and ordering the
100 illi ] illi primum V.

-- 4 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 5
sufficienter bonitas intrinseca utriusque actus, et commanded act to it, the intrinsic goodness of each act is
extrinseca informatio, vel denominatio unius ab alio. sufficiently understood, as well as the extrinsic informing
Minor vero patet in actibus externis a voluntate im- or denomination of one by the other. But the minor is clear
peratis, quia ab illo imperio denominantur boni, etsi in the case of external acts commanded by the will, because
140 nihil in eis ponat praeter substantiam eorum, et ratio 140R they are denominated good from that command, even if it
est, quia hoc imperium non consistit nisi in quadam places nothing in them beyond their substance. The reason
efficientia, fortasse non physica, sed moraliter per is because this command does not consist in anything other
consensionem et subordinationem potentiarum eius- than a certain efficiency, perhaps not physical, but morally
dem animae: haec ergo ratio imperii nihil ponit in through the accord and subordination of the powers of the
145 actu imperato, nisi dependentiam quamdam, quasi 145R same soul. Therefore, this ratio of command places nothing
applicationem ad opus, ratione cuius unus actus de- in the commanded act except a certain dependency, an
nominatur ab alio, et refertur in finem suum; ergo application as it were to the work, by reason of which one
idem est iudicium de bonitate solum fundata in hoc act is denominated by another and referred to its end. The
imperio. judgement is the same, therefore, about the goodness that
150R is grounded only in this command.
150	Ad 1.
argumentum
in n. 1.
6. Ad primum argumentum in principio fac- 6. To the first argument made in the beginning, I re- To the 1st
argument
in n. 1.
tum, respondetur finem extrinsecum respectu ac- spond that an extrinsic end with respect to an act that is
tus <col. b> imperati, et extrinsecus ordinati in ip- commanded and extrinsically ordered to it does not have
sum non habere rationem obiecti, nec materialis, nec the ratio of an object, whether material or formal, but rather
formalis, sed circumstantiae, seu causae remotae 155R [has the ratio] of circumstance or of a remote cause moving
155 moventis, et applicantis voluntatem ad talem actum and applying the will to such an act by means of an act
medio actu intentionis, seu electionis, ut satis sig- of intention or of choice. St. Thomas indicates this in ST
nificavit D. Thomas 1. 2. q. 18. art. 4. distinguens IaIIae.18.4 when he distinguishes the end from the object
finem ab obiecto, et dicens a fine sumi bonitatem, and says that goodness is taken from an end as from a
ut a causa bonitatis, et q. 19. art. 2. ad 1. dicens 160R cause of goodness, and in 19.2 ad 1 when he says that
160 respectu actus voluntatis, finem habere rationem an end has the ratio of an object with respect to an act
obiecti, praeterquam cum finis ordinatur ad finem, et of will except ‘when an end is ordered to an end and an
intentio ad intentionem; quapropter in actu sic ordi- intention to an intention’. For this reason, one should not
nato non oportet intelligere intrinsecam tendentiam understand there to be an intrinsic tendency to such an
in talem finem, sed solum dependentiam ab alio actu 165R end in an act ordered in this way, but only a dependency
165 respiciente illum finem; et hoc modo dicitur esse on another act that respects that end. In this way it is said
propter finem denominatione extrinseca, sicut actus to be for the sake of the end by an extrinsic denomination,
exterior; quapropter ille actus non proprie habet ra- just as an exterior act. For this reason, that act does not
tionem electionis, sed potius medii eliciti, et quasi properly have the ratio of choice but rather of an elicited
usus passivi. 170R means and, as it were, a passive use.
170	Ad 2. ibidem. 7. Ad secundum respondetur ex actu imperante, 7. To the second argument, I respond that out of a To the 2nd
argument in
the same
place.
152 imperati ] imperari A.
152 ordinati ] ordinari A.

-- 5 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 6
et imperato, ut sic, quodammodo componi actum commanding act and a commanded act, as such, an act
moraliter unum, sicut ex actu interiori, et exteriori, that is morally one is composed in a certain way, as from
et hoc modo dicitur ille actus meritorius, et formaliter an interior act and an exterior act. In this way that act is
bonus, et efficere hominem bonum; sed hoc totum 175R meritorious and formally good, and makes the human being
175 habet ratione actus imperantis, actui tamen imper- good. But the whole has this by reason of the commanding
ato, ut sic conveniunt haec per denominationem ex- act. Nevertheless, they apply to the commanded act as
trinsecam, seclusa bonitate, quam talis actus potest such through an extrinsic denomination, apart from the
habere ex suo obiecto, nam ut sic, habet rationem goodness that such an act can have from its object. For, To the
confirmation
in the same
place.
actus interioris eliciti a voluntate, et in hoc est differ- 180R as such, it has the ratio of an interior act elicited from the
180	Ad confirm.
ibidem.
entia inter illum, et exteriorem, per quod responsum will. In this lies the difference between it and an exterior
est ad confirmationem. act. This addresses the confirmation.
Unus modus
quo satis fit
argumento 3.
in eodem n. 1.
8. Tertium argumentum petit, quis sit actus vol- 8. The third argument asks what the act of the will is One way in
which the 3rd
argument in
the same place
is satisfied.
untatis, a quo sumitur haec denominatio, ad quod re- from which this denomination is taken. I respond that this
spondetur denominationem hanc posse sumi duobus 185R denomination can be taken in two ways in the suggested
185 modis in argumento insinuatis. Primus, et clarior argument. The first and clearer way is when a formal com-
est, quando intercedit formale imperium unius actus mand of one act of the will by another stands in between:
voluntatis ab alio scilicet, quia unus actus cadit in namely, because one act falls under a formally willed object
obiectum formaliter volitum sua propria ratione, et by its own reason and motive. This way of operating hap-
motivo, qui modus operandi facilius contingit quando 190R pens easily when the commanded act is truly interior, as
190 actus imperatus est vere interior, ut cum volo amare, when I will to love, to suffer, etc. In this case the response to
dolere, etc. Et tunc facilis est responsio ad argumen- the argument is easy, and there is no difficulty in a willing
tum, nec difficultatem ullam habet, quod voluntas of this kind easily making a reflection.
huiusmodi reflexionem facile faciat; quando autem But when the commanded act is exterior—for example,
actus imperatus est exterior, ut eleemosyna, ieiunia, 195R giving alms, fasting, etc.—then it can often happen that
195 etc., tunc frequenter potest accidere, ut ab eodem such an exterior act is also commanded by the very same
actu electionis efficacis, quae immediate fit propter act of efficacious choice that is immediately made for the
finem operantis, imperetur etiam talis actus exterior, sake of the agent’s end. In this case there will be no good-
et tunc in actu interiori nulla erit bonitas sumpta ab ness in the interior act that is taken from another, exterior
alio <368> actu exteriori, ut ab obiecte, ut supra dic- 200R act as from an object, as was said above. Consequently,
200 tum est, et consequenter neque actus exterior, ut ac- neither will the exterior act, insofar as it is an act, be de-
tus est, denominabitur bonus, nisi bonitate sumpta nominated good, except by the goodness taken from the
ex fine media electione; aliquando vero potest ac- end by means of the choice. But sometimes an exterior act
tus exterior, et propter se, et propter extrinsecum can be commanded immediately both for its own sake and
finem imperari immediate, et tunc erunt in voluntate 205R for the sake of an extrinsic end. In that case there will be
205 duo actus sese concomitantes, et eumdem exteri- two concomitant acts in the will, and the same exterior act
orem actum dupliciter denominantes; tandem potest will be denominated twice. Finally, now and then the will
interdum voluntas per electionem factam ob finem can command a whole act as composed of an exterior and
extrinsecum imperare totum actum alterius virtutis, an interior act of another power through a choice made on

-- 6 of 7 --

Suárez, DBM 6, sect. 4 7
ut compositum ex exteriori, et interiori, ut quando ex 210R account of an extrinsic end, as when from an intention for
210 intentione merendi impero mihi actum misericordiae, meriting I command to myself an act of mercy, not only
non tantum externum, sed etiam voluntatem mis- the external act but also the willing of having compassion,
erendi, quia etiam illa est aptum medium ad talem which is also an apt means towards such an end. And in
finem; et tunc eadem est ratio de tali actu, quae de this case the reasoning is the same for such an act as for
medio interiori: quando autem voluntas operetur uno, 215R interior means. But when the will operates in one or the
215 vel alio modo, non potest facile discerni, nisi in his, other way, matters may not be easy to discern, except in
qui magna animadversione, et reflexione operantur; those cases where things are done with great attention and
potest autem coniectura sumi considerata ratione fi- reflection. But a reasonable inference can be drawn once
nis, et mediorum, seu actuum, et proportione eorum the ratio of the end, the means or acts, and the proportion
inter se. 220R between them has been considered.
220	Alter modus. 9. Alter modus, quo potest hoc imperium, seu 9. The second way in which this command or relation The second
way.	relatio in finem excogitari est ex vi solius intentionis to the end can be thought about is as from the force of
immediate transeundo ad eliciendum actum alterius the intention alone immediately passing to eliciting the act
virtutis, omissa formali electione media: ut si quis of another power, having omitted the means by a formal
habeat intentionem bene merendi coram Deo, et con- 225R choice. For example, if someone has the intention to merit
225 sulat de mediis, seu modo, et iudicet amorem Dei well before the face of God, consults about means or about
propter se ipsum et super omnia esse aptissimum the way, and judges that loving God for his own sake and
ad illum finem consequendum, potest, ut videtur, above all other things is most apt for attaining that end,
voluntas pro libertate sua statim elicere amorem Dei the will can, it seems, through its freedom choose at once
propter seipsum, in quo apparet magna differentia in- 230R the love of God for his own sake. A great difference appears
230 ter actum exteriorem et interiorem, nam exterior pen- here between the exterior act and the interior act, for the
det omnino a formali applicatione voluntatis, et ideo exterior act depends entirely on the formal application of
quamvis voluntas intendat finem, et intellectus iu- the will. For this reason, although the will intends the
dicet motionem manus esse aptum medium ad illum end and the intellect judges a motion of the hand to be
finem, nunquam manus movebitur, donec voluntas 235R an apt means for that end, nevertheless, the hand will be
235 eligat, et utatur illa: at vero voluntas potest se ipsam moved for as long as the will chooses and uses it. The will,
determinare immediate ad actus suos, et acciden- however, can determine itself immediately to its acts, and
tarium est, quod per unum actum determinetur ad it is accidental that it is determined through one act to
alium quoad exercitium, et ideo si ex parte intellectus another act with respect to exercise. For this reason, if the
sit obiectum sufficienter propositum, potest imme- 240R object is sufficiently proposed on the part of the intellect,
240 diate exire in actum elicitum ante actum formaliter [the will] can immediately issue an elicited act before a
imperantem, et forte hic operandi modus frequentis- formally commanding act. In fact, perhaps this way of
simus est. operating is most frequent.
210 impero ] imperio V.
212 aptum ] actum V.

-- 7 of 7 --
