Last revision: January 28, 2024
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE DEO UNO ET TRINO III.3.11
© Sydney Penner 2024
TREATISE III: ON THE MOST HOLY MYSTERY OF THE TRINITY
BOOK 3: ON THE TRUE DISTINCTION OF THE THREE PERSON, AND
THE PREDICATES THAT ARE MULTIPLIED IN THEM
<588, col. a>2
There are three things to be discussed in the present book,
namely, what the distinction between the divine persons is, what
attributes or predicates are multiplied in the same divine persons
by reason of this distinction, and what words or ways of speaking
we can use to explain this distinction. But the fourth thing that
could be desired here principally—namely, through what the di-
vine persons are distinguished—will be better said in the seventh
book, since it presupposes their constitution.
CHAPTER 1.
IT IS SHOWN THAT THE DIVINE PERSONS ARE REALLY DISTIN-
GUISHED FROM EACH OTHER.
1. The error of Sabellius. – Here the error of Sabellius that should
be discussed occurs first. Sabellius applied the names of the three
persons to the same thing and person, as Athanasius reports in
the oration against the Arians on the phrase ‘God of God’. He
there explains the reason for the names in these words: The
Father is expanded into the Son by taking flesh and into the Holy
Spirit by sanctifying human beings; that is, the same person, as
unbegotten and the principle is called the Father, as incarnate
is called the Son, and as dwelling among humans through grace
is called the Holy Spirit. This is also taken from the report of
Athanasius in his oration against Gregales of Sabellius, and from
Basil, in his sermon against Sabellius, and from Eusebius, in
the seventh book of his History, chap. 5, and Nycephorus, book
1Translation is based on the Vivés edition (vol. 1).
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 4 --

Suárez, De Deo Uno et Trino III.3.1 2
six, ch. 26. Nor was this heretic the first author of this error,
but it is attributed to him because he explained and defended it
more. But it was taught earlier by Praxaeus, as is evident from
Tertullian, in his book against him, and by Noethus according to
Epiphanius, [Panarion], heresy 57. Tertullian also refers to it in
his book De praescriptionibus haereticorum, ch. 52. Nycephorus
in History, book 4, ch. 22, says that the Cataphrygians were in
this error, that of the Montanists, who are thought to be the same.
Perhaps this is why Jerome in Letter 54 to Marcellus says that
‘Montanus forced the Trinity into the confines of a single person’.
Or perhaps he said this because of his followers, for Epiphanius
says of Montanus himself that he did not think badly about the
Trinity (heresy 40). And from heretics arose those who are called
Patripassians, because they said that the Father suffered and
died for us, because they did not distinguish him from the Son.
In order to confirm this error, these heretics first of all used all
the testimonies by which we showed the divinity of individual
persons, then they added everything that proves the unity of God,
and from this they thought to conclude that the persons are not
distinguished in reality.
2. The Catholic assertion. – But Catholic truth teaches that
the divine Persons are distinct in reality (in re) from one another:
and so properly and really distinguished. The first part is of the
faith, strictly speaking, which is defined by all the Councils cited
in the third chapter of the previous book, and all the Fathers as
well, especially Pope Leo, letter 93, ch. 1, and Ignatius, letter 8
(‘We do not believe’, he says, ‘in one thing with three names, but in
three of the same honor’), Nazianzus best in De Theologia, oration
3, Hilary, De Synodis, in the beginning, and De Trinitate, books
6 and 7. We presented the testimonies of Scripture in book 1, ch.
2. For although this word ‘they are distinguished’ is not formally
found in Scripture, yet many things are found that include it,
such as ‘there are three’ (1 John 5[:7]). Also, the names ‘Father’
and ‘Son’ (Matt. 28) sufficiently show the distinction, if they are
understood with the property, as they should be understood,
because no thing begets itself such that the Father and the Son
could be with respect to the same person. And the word ‘proceed’,
which is found in John 8 and 14, shows the same thing. Also, the
relative ‘another’, which Christ the Lord uses in John 15 and 16.
For a thing entirely non-distinct is not another thing from itself.
This also includes that expression by which the Father is said ‘to
be in the Son’ and the ‘Son in the Father’, both in John 14 and

-- 2 of 4 --

Suárez, De Deo Uno et Trino III.3.1 3
in John 1 (‘the Word was with [God]’).3 Furthermore, wherever
Christ the Lord says ‘to receive himself from the Father’ and ‘the
Holy Spirit from himself and from the Father’, he clearly teaches
a distinction, since these things are not truly and properly said
of the same thing with respect to itself. Finally, it can also be
proven from the mission of the persons, as we will see below.
3. What kind of distinction there is between the persons. –
These, then, clearly show that there is a distinction in reality itself
between the persons. That this distinction should be called a ‘real’
distinction, however, I cannot find discussed under this term by
the Fathers or defined by the Councils. Nevertheless, I think it is
sufficiently contained in the things that are defined and in the
testimonies and expressions that were brought forward. For that
reason, I think it absolutely is of the faith. For this distinction,
which the faith teaches, is personal; that is, it constitutes distinct
persons. But a personal distinction is real. Furthermore, each
divine person considered in himself is a true thing subsisting per
se and one is not another; therefore, there is a real distinction
between them. For to be really distinguished is nothing other
than to be true things where one is not the other. The arguments
taken from substantial generation and production prove this very
thing, since there is no generation and production except between
really distinct things. And the same argument can be taken from
relative opposition adapted to such a procession.
4. Finally, this can be shown from the principles of meta-
physics: for there is no actual distinction in reality itself, except
either a real one or a modal one, or, as others call it, a formal one.
But this latter distinction is never found except within the same
thing that it composes or it in some way coalesces from those
things that are said to be distinct in such a way. Hence, what is
distinguished in this way from some thing is always like a mode
or affection of it, as is easily clear by induction. For this reason,
this mode of distinction, which truly and actually is in the thing
itself, has no place in God, because in him there is no place for
composition or modification or affection through something of
itself actually distinct in reality from the substance of God (as
needs to be explained more fully below in book 4). Therefore, all
that is left is a real distinction, which can exist between the divine
persons and which generally exists between all those entities that
have reality per se such that one is not a modification of the other.
3Suárez quotes the passage as ‘Verbam erat apud Verbum’ but the Vulgate
text reads ‘Verbum erat apud Deum.’

-- 3 of 4 --

Suárez, De Deo Uno et Trino III.3.1 4
The divine persons, moreover, are like this, as is clear from their
simplicity and highest perfection. Therefore.
5. In response to the general foundation of the heretics
suggested above, it must also be said in general that the true
divinity of three really distinct persons is not repugnant to the
unity of God, which unity of God is taken from the unity of the
divine nature. But one and the same true divinity can belong to
the three persons, as will become clear from what is to be said in
the following book.

-- 4 of 4 --
