Last revision: October 28, 2018	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE GRATIA, PROLEGOMENON 1, CAP. 11
© Sydney Penner 2013
<1>2
CAPUT I. CHAPTER I.
De nominibus naturae, et liberi arbitrii. On the names ‘nature’ and ‘freewill’.3
1. Quia libera natura gratiae fundamentum est, et 1. Since free nature is the foundation of grace and grace is
gratia perfectio, et sanitas est naturae, ideo dispu- the perfection and health of nature, a discussion of grace
5 tatio de gratia cognitionem aliquam talis naturae 5R presupposes some knowledge of such a nature. This is the
supponit, propter quod solent gratia, et natura, seu reason why grace and nature or freewill4 are usually con-
liberum arbitrium, non tantum in disputatione ipsa, joined not just in the same disputation but in the title of
sed etiam in titulo totius operis coniungi, sicut Au- the whole work. Augustine, for example, wrote one book Augustine.
Augustinus. gustinus librum unum de Natura, et gratia, et alium [entitled] On Nature and Grace and another one On Grace
10 de Gratia, et libero arbitrio scripsit. Propter hanc 10R and Freewill. For this reason, therefore, it is necessary that
ergo causam necessarium est in ingressu huius ma- in taking up this subject we first set out what we understand
teriae supponere quid nomine naturae, et liberi arbi- by the names ‘nature’ and ‘freewill’. For philosophers dis-
trii intelligamus. Nam philosophi in libris de Physico cuss nature in books examining [Aristotle’s] Physics insofar
auditu de natura disputant, prout principium est as it is the principle of motion and rest. But at present we
15 motus, et quietis; in praesenti vero non in ea latitu- 15R are not taking ‘nature’ that broadly but are taking it as it is
dine sumitur, sed prout dicitur per antonomasiam said through antonomasia of intellectual or rational nature,
de intellectuali, seu rationali natura, quae prin- which is the principle of the moral operations by which eter-
cipium est moralium operationum, quibus aeterna nal happiness is secured or lost. Only intellectual nature is
beatitudo comparatur, vel amittitur, ad quem finem ordered to this end through grace. For this reason, Augus-
1Latin text by and large follows the 1620 Lyon edition, with most abbreviations expanded and spellings modernized. Punctuation kept as is. I checked
the text against the Vivès edition for significant variations. I have not yet been able to check the first edition (Coimbra, 1619). For recorded variants, B =
1620 edition and V = Vivès edition. Note that the Vivès edition does not have marginal notes; many, though not all, of the marginal notes from the 1620
edition are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text at the head of paragraphs.
My thanks to Shane Duarte, who generously commented on my translation and spared me from a number of errors and infelicities.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in volume 7 of the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3Merely three years after the first publication of this work, the Spanish Franciscan Jeronimo Tamarit de Tavaria copies the bulk of the present chapter
in the identically titled chapter in his Flores theologiae (Valencia, 1622), tom. 1, pp. 491–92.
4I take ‘liberum arbitrii’ as a technical term naming the item under dispute. The equivalent term in contemporary philosophy might be ‘freedom of
the will’, though it has the disadvantage of already suggesting a theory as to which faculty would provide us with this freedom. I will translate ‘liberum
arbitrii’ with ‘freewill’ as a single word and reserve ‘freedom of the will’ for ‘libertas voluntatis’ where it is clear that it is the will’s freedom that is being
considered.

-- 1 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 2
20 sola intellectualis natura per gratiam ordinatur. 20R tine said in Against Julian IV, ch. 3, that only rational nature Augustine.
Augustinus. Et ideo dixit Augustinus lib. IV. contra Iulianum has the capacity for grace. But he is speaking about ratio-
cap. 3. solam rationalem naturam esse gratiae ca- nal nature insofar as it includes intellectual nature, since
pacem. Loquitur autem de rationali prout intellec- angelic nature as well as human nature has the capacity for
tualem complectitur, quia tam Angelica, quam hu- divine grace, since each is free.
25 mana natura capax est divinae gratiae, quia utraque 25R ‘But grace’, as Bernard says in On Grace and Freewill,
Bernardus. libera est. Gratiam autem (ut ait Bernardus de Gra- ‘cannot be given except by God and cannot be received except
tia et libero arbitrio) nec dare potest nisi Deus, nec by freewill’, that is, by a free nature. For a free nature is
capere nisi liberum arbitrium, id est, natura libera, required in order to achieve a supernatural end. But since
illa enim indiget, ut supernaturalem finem asse- human nature both is more familiar to us than angelic na-
30 quatur. Quia vero humana natura et nobis est 30R ture and is in need of grace under more headings and ways,
magis familiaris, et pluribus titulis, ac modis indi- we will always make our discussion about rational nature.
get gratia, <col. b> quam Angelica, ideo de rationali But the doctrine could easily be applied proportionately to
natura sermonem semper faciemus, doctrina vero angelic nature. For it will not be difficult to realize where the
facile poterit ad Angelicam cum proportione appli- basis of difference comes up and we will take care to indicate
35 cari: nam ubi ratio diversitatis intervenerit non dif- 35R it. Moreover, we are not now talking about human nature as
ficile intelligetur, eamque indicare curabimus. Non distinguished from the supposit nor about that more-than-
loquimur autem nunc de natura humana prout a human state that it obtains in the divine Word through the
supposito distinguitur, nec de statu illo plus quam hypostatic union. For the former consideration of nature is
humano, quem in divino Verbo per hypostaticam metaphysical and in no way pertains to the present subject,
40 unionem obtinuit: nam prior naturae speculatio 40R whereas the consideration of the latter mystery is loftier and
metaphysica est, nihilque ad praesentem causam we have pursued it in its proper place to the extent we are
spectat, alterius vero mysterii consideratio altior able. In the present place, then, we are considering human
est, quam suo loco pro viribus prosecuti sumus. In nature insofar as it is capable of grace in a created person,
praesenti ergo natura humana quatenus in persona and insofar as grace is necessary for it to operate well and
45 creata capax est gratiae, illaque ad bene operandum, 45R attain its end.
et ad suum finem consequendum indiget, consider-
atur.
2. Est autem ulterius advertendum gratiam 2. It should further be noted that grace perfects nature,
perficere naturam, praecipue quatenus humano- especially insofar as it is the principle of human and free
50 rum, ac liberorum actuum principium est. Unde acts. Hence, the result is that freewill and grace are so joined
fit, ut liberum arbitrium, et gratia tam sint habi- together in disposition and function that they cannot be
tudine, et officio coniuncta, ut non possint dis- 50R separated in discussion, as Augustine indicated well enough Augustine,
Letter 47.	Augustinus,
epistola 47.
putatione seiungi, ut satis indicavit Augustinus, in saying: ‘If there is not the grace of God, how does Christ
dicens: Si non est Dei gratia, quomodo Christus save the world? And if there is not freewill, how does he
55 salvat mundum? Et si non est liberum arbitrium, judge the world?’ And in Hypognosticon III, ch. 11, he says:
21 IV ] I B V.

-- 2 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 3
quomodo iudicat mundum? Et lib. 3. Hypognosti- ‘Grace without freewill does not make a human being have a
con cap. 11. Neque gratia sine libero arbitrio facit 55R happy life and neither does freewill without grace’. Bernard Bernard.
hominem habere beatam vitam, nec liberum arbi- says in On Grace and Freewill: ‘Take away freewill and there
Bernardus. trium sine gratia, et Bernardus de Gratia et libero is nothing to be saved; take away grace and there is nothing
60 arbitrio: Tolle liberum arbitrium, non erit quod sal- by which to be saved’. Hence, the primary difficulty in this
vetur, tolle gratiam, non erit unde salvetur. Unde matter is situated in reconciling the necessity and efficacy of
praecipua huius materiae difficultas in concilianda 60R grace with freewill. Ignorance of this concordance has been
gratiae necessitate, ac efficacia cum libertate arbi- the root and origin of almost all the errors that have been
trii posita est, et ignorantia huius concordiae fere made in this matter. It is necessary, therefore, first to deal
65 omnium errorum, qui in <2> hac materia fuerunt, with what is signified by the names ‘freedom’ and ‘freewill’
radix et origo fuit. Oportet ergo ante significationem before discussing the signification of ‘grace’.
gratiae, quid nomine libertatis, et liberi arbitrii sig-
nificetur praemittere.
Hugo
Victorinus.
Triplex
libertas, sed
illa, quae est a
necessitate,
est propria
libertas
moralis.
3. Et imprimis praemittenda est distinctio trip- 65R 3. In the first place, a distinction needs to be made Hugh of Saint
Victor.
Three kinds of
freedom, but
only freedom
from necessity
is proper
moral freedom.
70 licis libertatis, quam sic tradit Hugo Victorinus in between three kinds of freedom. Hugh of Saint Victor makes
Summa sententiarum tract. 3. cap. 9. Est namque the distinction this way in Summa sententiarum tr. 3, ch. 9:
(ait) triplex libertas, a necessitate, a peccato, a mis- ‘For freedom is threefold: from necessity, from sin, and from
eria. Nos vero aliter illa membra numeramus, est suffering’. But we number the members differently, for there
enim libertas a servitute, a coactione, et a neces- 70R is freedom from servitude, from coercion, and from necessity.
75 sitate; ex quibus sola haec tertia est propria liber- Of these, only the third kind is the proper moral freedom
tas moralis ad humanos actus laude, et reprehen- necessary for human acts to deserve praise and reprimand,
sione; praemio, aut poena dignos necessaria: unde rewards and punishments. Hence, it alone deserves the
illa sola simpliciter nomen libertatis meretur; reli- name ‘freedom’ strictly speaking.
quae enim eatenus libertates appellantur, quatenus 75R For the others are called freedoms only insofar as they
80 alicui necessitati opponuntur. Servitus enim quam- are opposed to some kind of necessity. For servitude brings
dam parendi necessitatem inducit, et ideo carentia in a kind of necessity of obeying, and for this reason the
Rom. 8. servitutis libertas appellatur Rom. 8. Liberabitur a absence of servitude is called freedom in Rom. 8[:21]: ‘[the Rom. 8.
servitute corruptionis. Potest autem servitus esse vel creature itself] shall be freed from the servitude of corruption’.
peccati, vel poenae: sicque carentia culpae, et remis- 80R Servitude, moreover, can be to sin or to punishment, and so
85 sio poenae dici potest libertas quaedam a peccato, the absence of guilt and the remission of punishments can
seu peccati servitute, iuxta illud Rom. 6. Cum servi be called a kind of freedom from sin or from servitude to sin,
essetis peccati, liberi fuistis iustitiae: nunc autem as in Rom. 6[:20–22]: ‘For when you were servants of sin, you
liberati a peccato, servi autem facti Deo, habetis were free of justice . . . but now having been freed from sin
2. Cor. 3. fructum in sanctificationem. Et 2. Cor. 3. Ubi spir- 85R and having been made servants of God, you have your fruit
90	Augustinus. itus Domini, ibi libertas. Unde etiam Augustinus unto sanctification’. And in 2 Cor. 3[:17]: ‘where the Spirit of 2 Cor. 3.
Augustine.	4. de Civitate cap. 3. Bonus (inquit) homo, etiamsi the Lord is, there is freedom’. Hence, Augustine also said in
86 6 ] 7 V.
91 3 ] 2 V.

-- 3 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 4
serviat, utique homini, liber est, scilicet a peccato; The City of God IV, ch. 3: ‘the good man, even if he serves,
malus autem etiamsi regnet, servus est, nimirum at least if he serves another man, is free’, namely, from sin;
peccati. Et ad eumdem modum lib. 14. de Civitate 90R ‘but an evil man is a servant even if he reigns’, namely, of
95 cap. 15. dixit, primum hominem peccando amisisse sin. And in the same way he says in The City of God XIV,
libertatem, quam concupivit. Non enim libertatem ch. 15, that the first man by sinning lost the freedom that he
a necessitate concupierat, nam illam a principio craved. For it was not freedom from necessity that he had
habuit, et ita neque illam amisit, sed libertatem a craved, for he had that from the beginning and he had not
subiectione appetiit, et hanc amisit, quia et peccati, 95R lost it. But he desired freedom from subjection and this he
100 et poenae, et miseriae servus factus est, et contraxit lost, since he was made a servant of sin, punishment, and
concupiscentiae inordinationem, et pugnam fomitis, suffering, and he contracted a disordering of concupiscence
quae servitus quaedam poenalis est. Atque ad hanc and a battle of lust, which is a kind of penal servitude. Every
significationem reducitur omnis carentia obligatio- absence of obligation or of debt—whether it arises from a law
nis, seu debiti, sive a lege, sive a quacumque alia 100R or from any other cause—is traced back to this signification.
105 causa proveniat: sic enim dispensatio, vel exemptio For thus a dispensation or exemption from a law is thought
a lege, libertas quaedam censetur; unde etiam privi- to be a kind of freedom. Hence, a privilege is also usually
legium nomine libertatis vocari solet; et cui aliquod given the name ‘freedom’, and someone for whom some debt
debitum remittitur, liberari ab illo dicitur. Si quis is remitted is said to be freed from that debt.
autem recte consideret, tota haec libertas supponit 105R But if someone were to consider the matter rightly, this
110 propriam libertatem a necessitate, quia non est ca- entire freedom presupposes a proper freedom from necessity.
pax propriae servitutis, culpae, aut poenae, prae- For only a person who is free in acting has the capacity for
cepti, <col. b> aut obligationis, nisi persona libera proper servitude, guilt, punishment, command, or obligation.
in agendo, ideoque sicut propria privatio supponit For this reason, just as a proper privation presupposes an
aptitudinem, ita servitus, et obligatio supponunt 110R aptitude, so also servitude and obligation presuppose a per-
115 personam aptam ad operandum cum indifferentia, son apt for operating with indifference and without necessity.
et absque necessitate. Quia vero operationes a ne- But since operations free from necessity can be under the
cessitate liberae possunt esse sub iure alterius, vel right of another or under some burden and obligation, there-
sub aliquo onere, et obligatione, ideo cum liber- fore the necessity of servitude and of obligation can exist in
tate a necessitate potest esse in operibus necessitas 115R works along with freedom from necessity. Or, what comes
120 servitutis, et obligationis, seu (quod idem est) potest to the same thing, someone can be deprived through law or
quis per legem, vel servitutem privari libertate illis servitude of the freedom that is contrary to them, and yet
contraria, et nihilominus retinere propriam operum retain the proper freedom of works.
libertatem.
Coactum idem
fere quod
violentum.
4. Coactum idem fere est quod violentum, 4. What is coerced is almost the same thing as what The coerced
almost the
same as the
violent.
125 utrumque enim est contra internum appetitum pati- 120R is subject to the violent, for each goes against the internal
entis, vel operantis, sed violentum generalius dicitur appetite of the patient or of the one operating. But violent
de quocumque motu contrario appetitui, sive elicito, is said more generally of any motion contrary to appetite,
sive innato: coactum vero proprie dicitur, quando whether elicited or innate, whereas [a motion] is properly
appetitui elicito, et vitali repugnat, licet interdum called coerced when it is in conflict with an elicited and vi-

-- 4 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 5
130 soleant voces illae confundi. Duo ergo ad coac- 125R tal appetite, although sometimes those terms are confused.
tum requiruntur, scilicet, ut ex necessitate fiat, vel Two things, therefore, are required for coerced motion: that
sustineatur, et quod sit contra internum affectum; it comes to be or be endured of necessity, and that it be
et ita coactio est quaedam necessitas, et aliquid ul- contrary to an internal affect. And thus coercion is a kind
Aristoteles. tra illam addit. Utrumque ex Aristotele 3. Ethicorum of necessity and adds something to it. Both are gathered
135 cap. 1. colligitur, dicente, violentum esse, quod est 130R from Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics III, ch. 1, where he says: Aristotle.
ab extrinseco, passo non conferente vim, id est, re- ‘the violent is from something extrinsic, without the patient
sistente aliquo modo, ut omnes exponunt ex eodem contributing force’, that is, without resisting in some way,
Aristotele 2. Ethicorum ad Eudemum cap. 8. quia as everyone explains it in accordance with what the same
si passum non resistat, motio non erit violenta, eti- Aristotle says in Eudemian Ethics II, ch. 8. For if what is
140 amsi ab extrinseco proveniat. Coactum ergo, ut tale 135R suffered is not resisted, the motion will not be violent even
est, non potest esse ab intrinseco, alioqui non es- if it arises from something extrinsic. The coerced, therefore,
set contra propriam inclinationem, si autem est ab insofar as it is such cannot be from something intrinsic. Oth-
extrinseco, eo ipso necessarium est, quia libertas erwise, it would not be contrary to one’s own inclination. But
a necessitate non est in patiendo, sed in agendo, if it is from something extrinsic, it is by that fact necessary.
145 ut infra probabo: ob hanc ergo causam et coactum 140R For freedom from necessity is not found in undergoing but
includit necessarium, et quod non est a coactione in acting, as I will prove below. For this reason, therefore,
liberum, ut tale est, non potest esse a necessitate the coerced includes necessity, and what is not free of coer-
immune. Propter alias vero conditiones non conver- cion, insofar as it is such, cannot be exempt from necessity.
titur coactum cum necessario, multa enim neces- But on account of other conditions the coerced is not inter-
150 saria sunt, quae contra internum appetitum non 145R changeable with the necessary. For there are many things
sunt, imo ex illo saepe nascuntur. Et ob eamdem ra- that are necessary that are not contrary to internal appetite.
tionem libertas necessitatem excludens universalior In fact, necessary things often arise from internal appetite.
est libertate soli coactioni opposita: nam omnis lib- For the same reason freedom that excludes necessity is more
ertas a necessitate est etiam a coactione exempta, universal than freedom that is opposed to coercion alone.
155 non vero e contrario, ut per se notum est; dilectio 150R For every freedom from necessity is also exempt from coer-
enim Dei in patria a coactione libera est, non tamen cion, but not the other way around, as is known per se. For
a necessitate. the love for God in the afterlife is free from coercion, yet not
free from necessity.
5. Libertas ergo a sola coactione tantum requirit 5. Therefore, freedom from coercion alone only requires
carentiam violentiae, ita ut motio, quae sic libera dic- 155R the absence of violence in such a way that a motion that is
160 itur, contra internum appetitum <3> non sit, sive called free in this way is not contrary to internal appetite,
ex necessitate fiat, sive non. Talis autem motio, si whether or not it happens by necessity. But such a motion,
sit voluntatis, dicenda est potius voluntaria, quam assuming it is of the will, should be called voluntary rather
libera. Hae namque duae proprietates in actibus than free. For these two properties in acts of the will are
voluntatis distinctae sunt, et ideo nominibus etiam 160R distinct and so they should also be distinguished by names,
158 5 ] 6 B.

-- 5 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 6
165 sunt distinguendae, ne verborum ambiguitas dispu- lest an ambiguity in words render the discussion uncertain.
tationem reddat incertam. Potest ergo esse actus It is possible, therefore, for an act of a human being to be
hominis voluntarius, ac subinde a coactione liber, voluntary and thereby free from coercion that, nevertheless,
qui tamen simpliciter liber a necessitate non sit, is strictly speaking not free of necessity. One can see this
ut in amore, quo Deus se amat, et quo Spiritum 165R in the love by which God loves himself and by which he
170 Sanctum producit, et quo beati diligunt Deum, et in produces the Holy Spirit and in the love with which the
actibus indeliberatis voluntatis, et in affectibus ap- blessed love God, as well as in undeliberated acts of the will
petitus sentientis videre licet. Ratioque satis constat and in the affects of an appetite of someone who is sensing.
ex dictis; his adiunctis, quae de ratione voluntarii The reason is sufficiently clear from what has been said,
Aristoteles 5.
Ethicorum
cap. 1.
D. Thomas 1.2.
q. 6. art. 1.
Aristoteles et D. Thomas tradiderunt. Voluntarium 170R along with these additional points made by Aristotle and Aristotle, EN
V, ch. 1.
St. Thomas,
ST IaIIae.6.1.
175 enim dicitur, quod est ab interno principio cum St. Thomas about the ratio of the voluntary. For something
cognitione, quae ratio tota potest in actu reperiri, is called voluntary that comes from an internal principle
quamvis ex necessitate fiat, quia sola necessitas non together with cognition. That whole ratio can be found in an
excludit cognitionem, nec conformitatem cum ap- act even though it comes to be by necessity, since necessity
petitu innato, vel elicito. Unde etiam ortum habuit 175R alone excludes neither cognition nor conformity to an innate
180 communis illa Theologorum doctrina, voluntati in or elicited appetite. Here, also, is the source for that doctrine
actibus elicitis non posse vim, aut coactionem in- common among the theologians that force or coercion cannot
ferri, etiamsi necessitatem pati possit. Nam coactio be inflicted on the will in the case of elicited acts even if it
excludit voluntarium, illi enim directe opponitur, can suffer necessity. For coercion excludes the voluntary,
non potest autem actus esse a voluntate, et non 180R since it is directly opposed to that, but an act cannot be
185 esse voluntarius, quia non potest non esse a prin- from the will and not be voluntary, since it cannot fail to
cipio intrinseco cum cognitione, nec potest simul be from an intrinsic principle together with cognition. Nor
esse voluntarius, et coactus, quia haec duo oppo- can it simultaneously be voluntary and coerced, since these
nuntur, et immediatam contradictionem involvunt; two are opposed and involve an immediate contradiction.
necessitas autem non involvit illam oppositionem 185R Necessity, however, does not involve that opposition to the
190 cum voluntario, quia necessitas ipsa potest esse vol- voluntary, since necessity itself can be voluntary or conform
untaria, seu interno appetitui conformis, ut dictum to an internal appetite, as was said.
est.
Duo
advertenda
quoad modum
loquendi
necessaria ad
intelligendos
Patres.
Primum.
6. Duo autem in hoc sunt, quoad modum lo- 6. But two things should be noticed in this regarding Two things
necessary for
understanding
the Fathers
with respect to
the way of
speaking.
First.
quendi, advertenda, quoniam ad intelligendas sen- the way of speaking, since they will be necessary for under-
195 tentias Patrum erunt necessaria. Unum est coac- 190R standing the views of the Fathers. One is that coercion is
tionem duplicem esse, unam simpliciter, quae ab- of two kinds. One is coercion simpliciter, which imposes an
solutam, et inevitabilem necessitatem contra inter- absolute and inevitable necessity against an internal affec-
num affectum infert: alia secundum quid, qualis tion. The other is coercion secundum quid, which is the kind
est, quae per poenas, vel timores fit, quae non ab- that comes from punishments and fears. They do not in-
200 solutam necessitatem, sed secundum quid, scilicet, 195R troduce an absolute necessity but only a qualified necessity
193 6 ] 5 B.

-- 6 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 7
ad vitandum tale incommodum, inducit. Prior ergo (secundum quid), namely, in order to avoid some disadvan-
coactio est, quae omnino repugnat actui elicito vol- tage. The former, therefore, is the coercion that is entirely
untatis, quia eo ipso quod est elicitus, iam non repugnant to an elicited act of the will, since the very fact
est coactus, posterior autem coactio esse potest that it is elicited makes it not coerced. But the latter kind
205 cum absoluta voluntate, imo et cum libertate, cum 200R of coercion is compatible with an absolute willing, in fact,
absolutam necessitatem non inducat, et ideo licet even with freedom, since it does not introduce an absolute
interdum coactio, aut violentia vocetur, ut patet necessity. For this reason, although it is sometimes called
Augustinus. ex Augustino lib. 1. contra Gau- <col. b> den- coercion or violence, as is clear from Augustine, Against Gau- Augustine.
tium cap. 25. et epistola 48. simpliciter, et abso- dentius I, ch. 25, and Letter 48, it is not, strictly speaking
210 lute coactio non est, sed alicuius mali prohibitio, ut 205R and absolutely, coercion. Rather, it is a prohibition of [doing]
dixit idem Augustinus lib. 2. contra litteras Petiliani some evil, as Augustine also said in Against the Letters of
cap. 83. Petilianus II, ch. 83.
Secundum
quod est
observandum.
7. Aliud animadvertendum est, interdum volun- 7. The other thing that should be noted is that sometimes The second
point that
should be
observed.
tarium actum ita esse necessarium simpliciter, ut a voluntary act is necessary simpliciter in such a way that
215 ipsa necessitas ab intrinseco sit, ac subinde con- 210R the necessity itself is from something intrinsic and so it is
formis sit inclinationi, et perfectioni naturali ipsius conformed to the inclination and to the natural perfection of
voluntatis, et tunc actus licet sit necessarius ita the will itself. In this case the act, although it is necessary,
est voluntarius, ut nullo modo dici possit violen- is voluntary in such a way that it can in no way be called
tus, vel coactus, quia nullo modo repugnat interno coerced or violent, since it is in no way repugnant to an
220 appetitui, neque elicito, quia actus, ut supponitur, 215R internal appetite. It is not repugnant either to an elicited
voluntarius est, nec innato, quia ipsa necessitas appetite because the act, as it is being imagined, is voluntary,
non est etiam voluntati, eiusve innatae inclinationi or to an innate appetite because the necessity itself is also
contraria, ut supponitur. Et hoc modo amor Dei not contrary to the will or to its innate inclination as it is
in beatis est necessarius sine ullo genere coactio- being imagined. In this way the love for God in the blessed
225 nis, aut violentiae, et affectus appetitus sentientis 220R is necessary without any kind of coercion or violence. The
possunt in eodem ordine poni propter eamdem ra- affected appetites of someone sensing can also be placed in
tionem. Aliquando vero actus voluntarius potest the same order for the same reason.
esse necessarius tantum ab extrinseco efficiente, But sometimes a voluntary act can be necessary only
seu quasi impellente, et tunc licet actus sit vol- from an extrinsic [principle] effecting or, as it were, impelling
230 untarius, et ideo non possit dici absolute coactus, 225R [the will to act]. In this case, although the act is voluntary
nihilominus cum necessitas ipsa non sit conformis and for that reason cannot be called absolutely coerced, nev-
naturali conditioni, et inclinationi voluntatis, eo ertheless, since the necessity itself is not conformed to the
quod sit tantum ab extrinseco, actus sic necessarius natural condition and inclination of the will as a result of the
interdum solet aliquo modo violentus dici, saltem fact that the necessity is only from an extrinsic [principle],
235 secundum quid, quia est contra modum connatu- 230R an act necessary in this way is sometimes wont to be called
ralem, et contra quemdam innatum appetitum. Et violent in some way, at least secundum quid. For it is con-
229 seu ] sed B.

-- 7 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 8
hoc modo necessitas immissa voluntati in actibus de trary to a connatural mode and contrary to a certain innate
se liberis vocari solet a Patribus coactio quaedam, et appetite. And in this way the necessity put into the will in
e converso actus simpliciter liber vocari solet sponta- the case of acts that are free of themselves is customarily
240 neus, et voluntarius, utique perfecte, et extrinsecam 235R called a kind of coercion by the Fathers. Conversely, an act
necessitatem interno appetitui, seu inclinationi vol- that is free simpliciter is usually called spontaneous and vol-
untatis repugnantem excludens. untary, at any rate perfectly so, and excluding the extrinsic
necessity repugnant to the internal appetite or inclination of
the will.
Liberum a
necessitate
dici solet et de
facultate
operandi
absque
necessitate, et
de ipsa
actione.
Augustinus.
8. Liberum ergo in praesenti vocatur, quod a 240R 8. Therefore, at present that is called free which is free Free from
necessity is
customarily
said both of a
faculty acting
without
necessity and
of the action
itself.
Augustine.
necessitate liberum est: dici autem solet et de facul- from necessity. Moreover, it is customarily said both of
245 tate operandi absque necessitate, et de ipsa actione. the faculty operating apart from necessity and of the action
Priori modo denominatur arbitrium liberum, quod itself. In the former way freewill is denominated, which
dicitur esse facultas voluntatis, et rationis, utique is said to be a faculty of the will and of reason, at least
ad operandum cum indifferentia, et dominio ac- 245R when operating with indifference and with dominion over
tionis, ita ut in manu eius sit velle, aut nolle ex- the action so that it is in one’s hands either to will or not
250 ercere, vel sustinere actionem. De quo dixit Au- to will to exercise or to undergo the action. In On the Merits
gustinus lib. 2. de Peccatorum meritis et remissione and Forgiveness of Sins II, ch. 18, Augustine said about
cap. 18. Esse voluntatis arbitrium, quod huc, atque this: ‘It is the decision of the will, which is freely turned
illuc liberum flectitur, atque in eis naturalibus bonis 250R to this or to that, and has its place among those natural
est, quibus homo bene, et male uti potest. Atque goods which a human being can use well or badly’. In this
255 in hoc sensu de fide certum est, hominem esse sense it is certain in the faith that human beings by their
hoc modo natura sua liberum, seu habere ali- <4> nature are free in this way or have some faculty free from
quam facultatem a necessitate liberam in operibus necessity in their works, not only in their natural works
suis, non solum naturalibus, sed etiam supernat- 255R but also their supernatural works. The Council of Trent Council of
Trent.	Concilium
Tridentinum.
uralibus, ut aperte definit Concilium Tridentinum clearly settles this in the Sixth Session (ch. 5 and canons 5
260 sess. 6. cap. 5. et can. 5. et 9. et Scripturis, et ra- and 9). Augustine proves it thoroughly from Scripture and
tionibus probat late Augustinus lib. de Gratia et by arguments in On Grace and Freewill, and the moderns
libero arbitrio, et latius moderni de hac materia even more thoroughly when writing about this subject. We
scribentes, et nos brevius in lib. 1. de Auxilio a 260R dealt with it more briefly in the beginning of Book I of De
principio. Praecipue vero videri possunt eruditae auxilio. But the erudite Disputations of Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarmine.
265	Bellarmini. disputationes Cardinalis Bellarmini in tota contro- may especially be consulted in the whole controversy about
versia de Gratia et libero arbitrio cum Praefatione. grace and freewill along with the preface.
Unde liber
actus
denominetur.
9. Hinc etiam actus, qui ab hac facultate lib- 9. Hence the act which proceeds from this free faculty Whence a free
act is
denominated.
era procedit, liber denominatur: oportet autem, ut 265R is also denominated free, but it must proceed from that
ab illa, ut indifferens est, procedat. Non enim de- faculty insofar as it is indifferent. For there is no lack of
270 fuerunt aliqui moderni Catholici, qui negaverint ad modern Catholics who deny that indifference or the absence
260 9 ] 6 V.

-- 8 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 9
libertatem actus esse necessariam indifferentiam, of necessity is necessary for freedom of action, but say that
seu carentiam necessitatis, sed satis esse caren- the absence of coercion is enough. But this view was among
tiam coactionis: sed haec sententia reprobata est 270R Michael Baius’s condemned assertions (assertions 39 and
inter assertiones Michaelis Baii assert. 39. et 41. et 41) and will be refuted ex professo in Book III. Therefore,
275 in lib. 3. ex professo refutabitur. Ut ergo actus in order for an act to be truly free, it is not enough that it
sit vere liber, non satis est, quod sit voluntarius, is voluntary or not coerced, but it must also not be strictly
seu non coactus, sed etiam ut non sit necessar- necessary, and, accordingly, it must proceed from a free
ius simpliciter, ac proinde, ut procedat a potentia 275R power that retains its indifference and freedom and that in
libera, ut indifferentiam, et libertatem retineat, ut its very use and exercise it be allowed to operate with its free
280 in ipso usu, et exercitio libera, et integra potestate and undiminished power, so that it is in its hands to choose
sua sinatur operari, ita ut in manu eius sit inter between contraries or contradictories, either to act or not to
contraria, vel contradictoria eligere, vel operari, aut act. For in order for an act to be free it is necessary that it
non operari. Quia ut actus sit liber, necessarium 280R proceed from a free faculty insofar as it is free. But an act
est, ut procedat a facultate libera, ut libera est; non will not proceed from a free power insofar as it is such unless
285 procedet autem a potentia libera, ut talis est, nisi ex- it has its faculty unencumbered with respect to either part,
peditam habeat suam facultatem quoad utramque at least with respect to acting and to not acting. For of what
partem, utique operandi, et non operandi. Quid advantage to the freedom of such an act is a power that has
enim proderit ad libertatem talis actus, quod poten- 285R an innate indifference if that indifference is impeded in that
tia innatam habeat indifferentiam, si in ipso usu use?
290	Quae
necessitas
repugnet actui
liberi arbitrii
eiusque
facultati:
quaeve non.
impediatur? Quapropter supposita distinctione data Therefore, assuming the distinction given between two Which
necessity is
repugnant to
an act of
freewill and its
faculty and
which one is
not.
de duplici necessitate, altera ab intrinseco per natu- kinds of necessity—one from an intrinsic [principle] through
ralem determinationem potentiae ad unum; alia ab a natural determination of the power to one object, the other
extrinseco per impulsum alicuius extrinseci agentis: 290R from an extrinsic [principle] through the impulse of some
prior repugnat non solum actui, sed etiam facultati extrinsic agent—the former is repugnant not only to the act
295 liberi arbitrii, et ideo fieri non potest, ut potentia but also to the faculty of freewill. Therefore, it cannot happen
libera tali necessitati subdita sit respectu eiusdem that a power subjected to such necessity is free with respect
obiecti, quia contradictionem involvit, ut per se no- to the same object, since that involves a contradiction, as
tum est. Posterior autem necessitas non repugnat 295R is known per se. But the latter necessity is not repugnant
facultati liberae, ut nunc suppono, ut paulo post to a free faculty, as I assume for now and as I will prove a
300 probabo, repugnat autem actui libero, quia, ut talis little later, but it is repugnant to free acts. For in order for
sit, oportet, ut procedat a potentia, ut libera, vel an act to be free, it is necessary that it proceed from a power
quoad specificationem, vel saltem quoad exercitium, insofar as it is free, either with respect to specification or
iuxta modum, quo actus liber fuerit, quia non habet, 300R at least with respect to exercise, according to the mode by
quod sit liber, nisi per denominationem a suo prox- which the act will be free. For an act does not have what
305 imo principio. At vero si actus procedat <col. b> it takes to be free except through denomination from its
a potentia necessitatem patiente, sive per intrinse- proximate principle. On the other hand, if the act proceeds
274 39 ] 30 V.

-- 9 of 10 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 1 10
cam necessitatem potentiae determinatae ad unum, from a power suffering necessity, either through the intrinsic
sive per extrinsecam necessitatem immissam poten- 305R necessity of a power determined to one object or through
tiae de se liberae, iam impeditur, et tollitur libertas an extrinsic necessity imposed on a power free of itself, the
310 actus; ita ut liber dici non possit, nec laude, vel vitu- freedom of the act is already prevented or removed. Thus
perio dignus, quia non procedit a potentia, ut libera the act cannot be called free and does not merit praise or
est, nam ipsa non valet necessitatem illam auferre, blame. For it does not proceed from a power insofar as it
vel praevenire, et ideo non potest illi imputari, quod 310R is free, since it does not prevail to remove or forestall that
tali modo, et non alio operetur. Quam doctrinam necessity. And for this reason it cannot be held responsible
315	Tridentinum. satis clare docuit Concilium Tridentinum loco citato, for acting in that way and not in another way. This doctrine
et necessaria omnino est ad salvanda omnia, quae is taught clearly enough by the Council of Trent in the cited Council of
Trent.	de humanis actionibus, earumque libertate Scrip- place. Furthermore, it is entirely necessary to preserve all
tura docet. Ideoque censeo in hoc puncto non essse 315R the things that Scripture teaches about human actions and
dissensionem inter Catholicos, licet in modo expli- their freedom. Therefore, I think that there is no dissension
320 candi, et defendendi hanc libertatem possit esse about this point among Catholics, although there can be
aliqua diversitas. some diversity in the way this freedom is explained and
defended.

-- 10 of 10 --
