Last revision: October 28, 2018	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE GRATIA, PROLEGOMENON 1, CAP. 31
© Sydney Penner 2013
<10>2
CAPUT III. CHAPTER III.
Utrum recte describatur potestas libera esse, quae Whether a power that after all the prerequisites for acting
positis omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum potest have been posited can both act and not act is rightly de-
agere, et non agere. scribed as being free.3
5 1. Punctum hoc tractavi in lib. 1. de Auxiliis, quia 5R 1. I treated this point in Book I of De concursu, motione et
illius resolutionem, et declarationem, ad intelligen- auxilio Dei,4 since I think its resolution and explanation to
dum usum libertatis, et concordiam eius cum gra- be most necessary for understanding the use of freedom
tia censeo esse valde necessariam, et ob eamdem and its harmony with grace. For the same reason I judge
causam iterum hic praemittendum esse iudicavi, that we should start here for a second time, since some
10 quia nonnulli moderni, licet descriptionem, seu 10R moderns, although they do not dare simply to deny that
propositionem illam simpliciter negare non audeant: characterization or proposition, they restrict it in various
illam limitant variis modis, prout unicuique, ad ways as seems advantageous to each one in defending his
proprias sententias in aliis punctis defendendas own views in other points. It is necessary, therefore, to
commodum videtur. Has ergo limitationes hic ex- evaluate these restrictions here so that afterwards we can
15 pendere necesse est, ut postea cum solido funda- 15R proceed from a solid foundation.
Verbum,
potest, in
sensu
composito et
diviso
accipitur.
mento procedere valeamus. Ut autem intelligantur But in order to understand these restrictions, one should The word ‘can’
is taken in a
composed
sense and a
divided sense.
limitationes, sciendum est, verbum illud, potest, in know that it is usual to take that word ‘can’ in the posited
descriptione positum, duobus modis accipi solere, characterization in two ways, namely, in a composed sense
scilicet in <col. b> sensu composito, vel diviso, id or in a divided sense. That is, either such that both acting
20 est, vel ut cum illis omnibus praerequisitis stare 20R and not acting are compatible with all those prerequisites,
simul possit, tam agere, quam non agere; vel ut or such that with those prerequisites standing the power
1Latin text by and large follows the 1620 Lyon edition, with most abbreviations expanded and spellings modernized. Punctuation kept as is. I checked
the text against the Vivès edition for significant variations. I have not yet been able to check the first edition (Coimbra, 1619). For recorded variants, B =
1620 edition and V = Vivès edition. Note that the Vivès edition does not have marginal notes; many, though not all, of the marginal notes from the 1620
edition are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text at the head of paragraphs.
My thanks to Shane Duarte, who generously commented on my translation and spared me from a number of errors and infelicities.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in volume 7 of the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3Merely three years after the first publication of this work, the Spanish Franciscan Jeronimo Tamarit de Tavaria summarizes the present chapter in
the identically titled chapter in his Flores theologiae (Valencia, 1622), tom. 1, pp. 495–96.
4The first of Suárez’s Opuscula, which can be found in vol 11 of the Vivés edition.

-- 1 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 2
stantibus illis praerequisitis potentia retineat inte- retains its complete freedom yet cannot use it for not acting
gram libertatem suam, non tamen possit uti illa ad except with the removal of some one of the stated prerequi-
non agendum, nisi aliquod ex dictis praerequisitis sites.
25 auferatur.
Prima limitatio
aliquorum.
2. Primus ergo modus interpretandi, vel limi- 25R 2. The first way of interpreting or restricting that charac- The first
restriction
[proposed] by
some.
tandi illam descriptionem est, ut si verbum, potest, terization, then, is (if the word ‘can’ is taken in the composed
accipiatur in sensu composito, limitanda sit ad sense) that it should be restricted to the prerequisites on the
praerequisita ex parte causarum secundarum, ut part of secondary causes—such as the intellect, the object,
30 intellectus, obiecti, et phantasiae, et si quid est al- the imagination, and anything else that is similar—and it
iud simile, non tamen extendatur ad praerequisita 30R should not be extended to the prerequisites on the part of
ex parte Dei: tum quia praevius concursus est nec- God. This is both [i] because a previous concursus on the
essarius ex parte Dei, et tamen illo posito non potest part of God is necessary, yet once it has been posited the will
voluntas agere, et non agere, sed tantum agere: tum cannot both act and not act, but can only act, and also [ii]
35 etiam quia voluntas, qua Deus vult liberum arbi- because the willing by which God wills freewill5 to operate
trium operari, est necessaria, ut arbitrium operetur, 35R is necessary for freewill (arbitrium) to operate, and it is one
et est ex praerequisitis, quia praecedit ipsum actum, of the prerequisites since it precedes the act itself and the
et determinationem voluntatis creatae: et posita illa determination of the created will. Once that willing by God
Dei voluntate, non stat voluntatem creatam liberam has been posited, it does not remain possible for the created
40 non operari; ergo necessario ab illa descriptione ex- free will not to operate. It is necessary, therefore, to remove
cipienda sunt praerequisita ex parte primae causae. 40R the prerequisites on the part of the first cause from that
Alvarez.
Ledesma.
Ita opinatur Alvarez, disp. 115. Ledesma, art. 10. §. characterization. Alvarez thinks this in [De auxiliis gratiae Alvarez.
Ledesma.	Sed antequam, post 7. concl. et alii. et humani arbitrii viribus] disp. 115, and Pedro de Ledesma6
in [De divinae gratiae auxiliis] art. 10, in the section starting
‘But before . . . ’ after the 7th conclusion, as well as others.
Secunda
limitatio.
3. Secundus modus limitandi descriptionem il- 45R 3. The second way of restricting that characterization The second
restriction.	45 lam est, ut si intelligatur de omnibus praerequisitis, is so that if it is understood to include all prerequisites or
tam ex parte Dei, quam ex parte aliarum causarum, necessary conditions, both on the part of God and on the
vel conditionum necessariarum, verbum, potest, ac- part of the other causes, the word ‘can’ should be taken
cipiendum sit in sensu diviso, non in composito, in the divided sense rather than the composed sense, with
respectu utriusque actus agendi, et non agendi, 50R respect to each act of acting and not acting, which also are
5I take ‘liberum arbitrii’ as a technical term naming the item under dispute. The equivalent term in contemporary philosophy might be ‘freedom of
the will’, though it has the disadvantage of already suggesting a theory as to which faculty would provide us with this freedom. I will translate ‘liberum
arbitrii’ with ‘freewill’ as a single word and reserve ‘freedom of the will’ for ‘libertas voluntatis’ where it is clear that it is the will’s freedom that is being
considered. A benefit to using ‘freewill’ is that it is readily read as referring to a faculty rather than an act. A disadvantage, however, is that ‘arbitrium’
used by itself cannot be translated as ‘will’ because ‘will’ needs to be reserved for ‘voluntas’. I will translate ‘arbitrium’ with ‘choice’, even though that
obscures the connection between ‘arbitrium’ and ‘liberum arbitrium’.
6There are at least two other scholastics with the name ‘Ledesma’, but Pedro de Ledesma seems the likeliest one for Suárez to have in mind here.
39 stat ] obstat B.

-- 2 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 3
50 etiam divisim, seu sigillatim sumpti. Ita ut sensus taken separately or individually. Thus the sense is that that
sit, illam potentiam esse liberam, quae positis om- power is free which still retains in itself the power not to act
nibus requisitis, adhuc in se retinet potestatem non once all the prerequisites are posited, even though it is not
agendi, etiamsi stantibus illis omnibus praerequi- possible for it to not act when all those prerequisites obtain.
sitis, cum illis coniungi non possit, ut non agat, 55R Rather, some one of those prerequisites must be removed in
55 sed oporteat aliquod ex illis praerequisitis auferri, order for the free power to use its capacity for not acting. In
ut potentia libera sua potestate non agendi utatur. a similar way when such a power does not act or does not
Et simili modo quando talis potentia non agit, aut will, it retains the capacity to act, and for that reason it is
non vult, potestatem retinet agendi, et ideo libera free, although it cannot conjoin that action or volition with
est, non potest tamen coniungere actionem, vel voli- 60R precisely those prerequisites that concur in the case where it
60 tionem cum solis illis praerequisitis, quae tunc con- does not will, unless something that is absent is added and
currunt, quando non vult, nisi aliquid, quod deerat, surpasses the order of nature or of causality.
addatur, et ordine naturae, seu causalitatis praece- The mentioned authors also approve this way of speaking,
dat. Et hunc etiam modum dicendi approbant dicti but they reject any other sense of that characterization,
auctores: in quolibet autem alio sensu illam de- 65R which they also say is not handed down by Aristotle, St.
65 scriptionem reiiciunt, quam etiam dicunt non esse Thomas, the Master, or any other important doctor, but was
ab Aristotele, D. Thoma, Magistro, vel aliquo gravi invented by Jacques Almain and other nominalists. And
doctore traditam, sed ab Almaino, et quibus- <11> thus they easily scorn everything that we said about that
dam Nominalibus inventam. Et ita facile omnia characterization in Book I of De concursu, motione et auxilio
contemnunt, quae de illa descriptione in lib. 1. de 70R Dei.
70 Auxiliis diximus.
Prima assertio,
vera est
definitio
libertatis in
titulo posita.
Victoria.
4. Nihilominus iterum dicimus descriptionem 4. Nevertheless, we say again that that characterization The first
assertion: the
definition of
freedom
posited in the
title is true.
illam optimam esse, et a gravissimis Auctoribus tra- is best and was handed down by the most important authors,
ditam vel eisdem, vel aequivalentibus verbis. Imo either in the same words or in equivalent words. In fact, I
existimo, ante nuperas controversias circa auxilium think that before the appearance of the recent controversies
75 efficax gratiae exortas, descriptionem illam fuisse 75R about the efficacious help of grace that characterization
a Doctoribus, et in scholis communiter probatam, was commonly proved by the doctors and in the schools,
ut affirmat Victoria Relectiones de homine veniente as Francisco de Vitoria affirms in Relectiones theologicae Vitoria.
ad usum rationis q. 1. propos. 3. ubi etiam ipse XIII (‘On that to which one is held who is coming to the
illam supponit, licet ad usum liberi arbitrii amplius use of reason’), q. 1, propos. 3, where he also presupposes
80 requirat. Eamdem supponit tanquam communem 80R it, even though it is more required for the use of freewill.
Valentia. Valentia 2. tom. disp. 8. q. 5. punct. 4. §. 4. ubi ait Gregory of Valencia supposes the same as the common view Gregory of
Valencia.	in hoc consistere essentialiter libertatem actionis. in Commentariorum theologicorum tomi quatuor II, disp. 8. q.
Corduba. Eamdem ponit, ut receptam sententiam Corduba 5, punct. 4, §4, where he says freedom of action consists
in lib. 1. Quaestionarum q. 55. dub. 9. et 10. et essentially in this. Antonio de Córdoba takes this as the Córdoba.
85	Nemesius. sumitur ex Nemesio lib. de Natura hominis cap. 85R received view in Quaestionarium theologicum libris quinque
35. dicente, Esse autem liberum, si eisdem positis distinctum I, q. 55, dub. 9 and 10, and it is taken from
causis in nobis esset aliquando appetere, aliquando Nemesius, On Human Nature, ch. 35, where he says: ‘but to Nemesius.

-- 3 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 4
Scotus.
Gabriel.
Ocham.
Marsilius.
Dionysius.
Henricus.
Hervaeus.
Soto.
Curielus.
refugere, etc. Et ex Scoto 2. d. 25. q. unica in fine, be free is, if the same causes are posited in us, sometimes
et ibi Gabriel n. 3. dub. 3. et 4. et in 1. d. 48. cap. to seek, sometimes to flee . . . ’ It is also taken from Scotus, Scotus.
Gabriel.
Ockham.
Marsilius.
Dionysius.
Henry of
Ghent.
Hervaeus
Natalis.
Soto.
Curiel.
90 3. et ibi Ocham et quodlibet 1. q. 16. et Marsilius 90R II, d. 25, the end of the only question; Gabriel, II, d. 25, n.
2. q. 16. art. 4. et Dionysius Cisterciensis 2. d. 25. 3, dub. 3 and 4, and I, d. 48, ch. 3; Ockham, I, d. 48, ch. 3,
art. 2. concl. 2. et art. 3. concl. 4. Henricus quodli- and Quodlibet 1, q. 16; Marsilius of Inghen, II, q. 16, art. 4;
bet 1. q. 16. Hervaeus quodlibet 1. q. 1. Soto lib. Dionysius the Cistercian,7 II, d. 25, art. 2, concl. 2, and art.
1. de Natura et Gratia cap. 16. ubi ponit illam, ut 3, concl. 4; Henry of Ghent, Quodlibet 1, q. 16; Hervaeus
95 receptam definitionem liberi arbitrii. Et novissime 95R Natalis, Quodlibet 1, q. 1; and Domingo de Soto, On Nature
consentit Curielus Controversiae 2. in Epistola 2. and Grace I, ch. 16, where he assumes it as the received
D. Petri n. 234. Denique ex Aristotele ac D. Thoma definition of freewill. And very recently Juan Alfonso Curiel
paulo post illam comprobabimus. Ratio autem po- agrees in Controversiae in diversa loca Sacrae Scripturae II,
tissima est, quia per illa verba optime declaratur in n. 234 of the part on 2 Pet. Finally, we will confirm it
100 internum dominium voluntatis in actiones suas, et 100R a little later from Aristotle and St. Thomas. But by far the
proxima potestas operandi, et non operandi, vel chief reason is that the internal control of the will over its
operandi contrarium, quae vix potest aliis verbis actions and the proximate capacity to act and not to act or
commodius explicari. to act contrarily is best revealed through those words. It can
hardly be explained more helpfully through other words.
Pronuntiata
liberi arbitrii.
5. Assumptum declaratur imprimis per varias 105R 5. The assumption is confirmed especially through briefly Accounts of
freewill.	105 definitiones liberi arbitrii ab aliis traditas breviter discussing the different definitions of freewill given by others.
discurrendo. Quinque sumi possunt ex Illustris- Five can be taken from the most illustrious Bellarmine, On
simo Bellarmino lib. 3. de Gratia et libero arbitro et Grace and Freewill III, and he himself adds a sixth, although
ipse addit sextam, quae tamen proprie definitiones they are not properly definitions but a kind of simple as-
non sunt, sed quaedam sunt simplices assertiones 110R sertion of some properties of freewill. For it is of this sort
110 aliquarum proprietatum liberi arbitrii. Tale enim [to assert] that freewill is a ‘rational willing’ or that it is a
est, quod liberum arbitrium sit rationalis voluntas, ‘capacity for serving rectitude for the sake of rectitude itself’.
vel quod sit potestas servandi rectitudinem propter Others in a certain way include what is defined in the def-
ipsam rectitudinem. Aliae quodammodo involvunt inition, as when it is said that choice (arbitrium) is a ‘free
definitum in definitione, ut cum dicitur arbitrium 115R judgement of reason’, as St. Thomas reports some philoso- St. Thomas.
The Master.	115 esse liberum de ratione iudicium, ut ex Philosophis phers saying in ST IaIIae.17.1 ad 2, along with the Master in
D. Thomas.
Magister.
refert D. Thomas <col. b> 1. 2. q. 17. art. 1. ad II, at the start of d. 25. Or it is said to be a ‘habit of the mind,
2. cum Magistro in 2. d. 25. in principio, vel esse free of itself’,8 or to be a ‘consent of the soul on account of
habitum animi liberum sui, vel esse consensum ob a freedom that cannot be lost’, or a ‘free power to elect or
inamissibilem animi libertatem, vel liberam potes- 120R accept and to reject’.
120 tatem eligendi, aut acceptandi, et respuendi. Ut For even if I disregard the other defects that can be
7Is there a Cistercian Dionysius or does Suárez mean Denis the Carthusian, i.e., Dionysius Cartusiensis?
8Bernard of Clairvaux, De gratia et libero arbitrio, ch. 1.
93 quodlibet 1. ] om. V.

-- 4 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 5
enim omittam alios defectus, qui in his locution- found in these phrases if they are taken as proper defini-
ibus, si ut propriae definitiones accipiantur, no- tions, every time the name ‘free’ or ‘freedom’ is placed in
tari possunt; quoties nomen, liberi, vel libertatis, in the definition, the definition includes what is defined and
definitione ponitur, definitio involvit definitum, et 125R remains just as obscure. For when freewill is put forward
125 aeque obscura manet, quia cum liberum arbitrium to be defined, one especially desires to be shown what that
definiendum proponitur, maxime declarari desider- word ‘free’ signifies or what that freedom is in reference to
atur, quid significet illud, liberum, vel quid sit illa which it is denominated free. But this is not explained in
libertas, unde liberum denominatur, hoc autem in those characterizations but rather is found in them. For
illis descriptionibus non declaratur, sed reperitur, et 130R this reason I say that what is being defined is found in the
130 ideo dico in illis definitum involvi. E contrario vero characterizations. But, conversely, when the Master says in The Master.
Idem. cum Magister in 2. d. 24. dicit liberum arbitrium II, d. 24, that freewill is the ‘faculty of the will and of reason
esse facultatem voluntatis, et rationis, qua bonum, by which good and bad are elected’, he neither adequately
vel malum eligitur, nec adaequate explicat facul- explains that faculty (for freedom can be exercised not only
tatem illam; quia libertas non solum in electione, 135R in election but also in other acts of the will and not only in
135 sed etiam in aliis actibus voluntatis, nec solum electing between good and bad but also in electing between
in electione inter bonum, et malum, sed in elec- multiple goods) nor does he reveal what it is for an election,
tione inter plura bona exerceri potest: neque etiam consent, or volition to be free, which is what was especially
declarat quid sit electionem, aut consensum, vel desired. Hence, St. Thomas said in ST IaIIae.1.1, not in St. Thomas.
volitionem esse liberam, quod maxime desideratur. 140R defining but in asserting, that ‘freewill is a faculty of the will
140	D. Thomas. Unde D. Thomas 1. 2. q. 1. art. 1. non definiendo, and of reason’, and as it were silently completing the char-
sed asserendo dixit, liberum arbitrium esse facul- acterization, he adds that that faculty is the one ‘through
tatem voluntatis, et rationis, et quasi tacite com- which a human being is in control of his acts’. He suggests
plens descriptionem, addidit illam facultatem esse through this that a power’s freedom consists in its control
per quam homo est dominus suorum actuum. Per 145R over its acts. Control, moreover, is the faculty of using and What control
is.	145 hoc insinuans, libertatem potentiae consistere in not using or doing and not doing. For this reason, some
Dominium
quid sit.
dominio sui actus. Dominium autem est facultas moderns say that freewill is the ‘faculty of the will and of
utendi, et non utendi, seu faciendi, et non faciendi, reason for either’, that is, for doing and not doing and for
et ideo moderni aliqui liberum arbitrium dicunt esse doing one thing or another. This indeed was truly said, and
facultatem voluntatis, et rationis ad utrumlibet, id 150R it was selected from Aristotle, Metaphysics IX, ch. 3, text. Aristotle.
St. Thomas.	150 est, agendum, vel non agendum, et agendum unum, 12, and elsewhere, and from St. Thomas, ST IaIIae.6.2 ad 2,
vel alterum. Quod quidem vere dictum est, et ex IaIIae.13, and Ia.83. But as that is a proprium of freewill, it
Aristoteles.
D. Thomas.
Aristotele desumptum 9. Metaphysicorum cap. 3. must be understood of a proximate power. Otherwise that
alias text. 12. et ex D. Thoma 1. 2. q. 6. art. 2. ad 2. would not be a proprium of a formally free power. Therefore,
et q. 13. et 1. p. q. 83. ut autem illud sit proprium 155R in order to explain this it is necessary to add the phrase
155 liberi arbitrii, debet intelligi de potentia proxima, posited in the given characterization: ‘after all prerequisites
alias non erit illud proprium potentiae formaliter for acting have been posited’.
liberae; ergo ad hoc explicandum necessarium est
addere particulam in dicta descriptione positam,

-- 5 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 6
positis omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum.
160	Ex
aequiparatione
ad intellectum
probatur.
6. Utrumque declarare possumus intellectum 6. We can make both clear by comparing intellect and It is proven
from a
comparison to
the intellect.
cum voluntate comparando: nam etiam intellectus will. For intellect also has the capacity to act and not act,
habet facultatem agendi, et non agendi, ut credendi, 160R to believe and not believe, or to dissent and assent, and
et non credendi, vel etiam dissentiendi, et assen- yet it is not formally free as the will is. It is necessary,
tiendi, et nihilominus <12> non est formaliter liber, then, to explain this difference in the definition of freewill.
165 sicut voluntas: ergo necesse est hoc discrimen in That cannot happen without the phrase in question. For
definitione liberi arbitrii explicare, quod sine illis we assume that freewill is neither multiple powers taken
particulis non fit. Supponimus enim, liberum arbi- 165R separately nor a collection of powers, but is one power alone
trium non esse plures potentias divisim sumptas, that is the controller of its acts. But to be a capacity to
nec collectionem earum, sed unam solam, quae sit do one thing and to do its opposite or to act and not to
170 domina suorum actuum; esse autem facultatem act applies not just to one power but to many, as was said
agendi unum, et oppositum, vel agendi, et non about the intellect. It applies in its way even to the sensitive
agendi, non uni tantum, sed multis potentiis con- 170R appetite, and much more to the will. Therefore, this capacity
venit, ut dictum est de intellectu; et suo modo con- for either, taken in a general and imprecise way, does not
venit etiam appetitui sensitivo, et multo magis vol- explain the peculiar nature (proprietas) of this unique and
175 untati: ergo per hanc facultatem ad utrumlibet gen- simple power that is freewill, nor the proper ratio through
eratim et indistincte sumptam non explicatur pro- which it is constituted in the ratio of a formally free power.
prietas illius unicae, ac simplicis potentiae, quae est 175R In order to explain this [kind of power], therefore, one rightly
liberum arbitrium, nec propria ratio, per quam in ra- adds that it is a power that has the capacity to act and not
tione potentiae formaliter liberae constituitur. Ergo to act after all the prerequisites for acting have been posited.
180 ad hoc explicandum merito additur, esse potentiam, For it is through this last phrase that one best explains
quae habet facultatem agendi, et non agendi positis the intrinsic force of a free power to elicit or sustain an act
omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum. Per hanc enim 180R through its power alone and not just as the result of the
ultimam particulam optime explicatur vis intrinseca absence of some condition necessary for acting or for not
liberae potentiae ad eliciendum, vel sustinendum acting.
185 actum sola sua potestate, et non ex defectu alicuius
conditionis necessariae ad agendum, vel non agen-
dum.
Sola voluntas
potest efficere,
et suspendere
actum positis
omnibus
requisitis.
7. Unde quia hic modus operandi soli voluntati 7. Hence, since this way of operating applies only to The will alone
can effect and
suspend an
act once all
the
prerequisites
have been
posited.
convenit, ideo illa est formaliter libera, et liberum the will, it for that reason is formally free and is freewill.
190 arbitrium. Intellectus autem non habet hanc facul- 185R The intellect, however, does not have this intrinsic faculty
tatem intrinsecam ita indifferentem, ut sese possit indifferent in such a way that it can determine itself to act
determinare ad actum, vel suspendere illum, aut ad or to suspend that act or to determine itself to an opposite
oppositum se determinare. Nam si obiecti veritas act. For if the truth of the object is evident and it is suf-
sit evidens, et sufficienter proponatur, ex neces- ficiently proposed, the intellect gives assent by a natural
195 sitate naturali praebet assensum; si vero non sit 190R necessity. But if it is not evident but only appears probable
evidens, sed probabilis, vel credibilis appareat, non or credible, the intellect cannot determine itself except by

-- 6 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 7
potest sese determinare, nisi intercedente voluntate the intercession of will (as is certain in the case of Christian
(ut in fide Christiana certum est, et idem est cum faith and the same is true with proportion in human cases).
proportione in humana). Et tunc nunquam intellec- Even in that case no intellect, once all the prerequisites for
200 tus, positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, potest 195R acting have been posited, can both act and not act, since
agere, et non agere, quia unum ex praerequisitis one of the prerequisites for acting is that it be moved by
ad agendum est, ut moveatur a voluntate, et posita the will. By positing such a motion it cannot fail to act, but
tali motione non potest non agere, illa autem non if it is not posited then it necessarily does not act, not so
posita, necessario non agit, non tam ex potentia much from a power for not acting but from an inability to
205 non agendi, quam ex impotentia agendi. Voluntas 200R act. But the will, once all the prerequisites for acting have
autem positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, sicut been posited, just as it can act from an internal capacity
potest agere ex interna facultate se determinando, for determining itself without the motion of another power,
sine motione alterius potentiae, ita ex eadem interna so also from the same internal capacity it can not act, by
facultate potest non agere, suspendendo suum in- suspending its influence with its internal power and control.
210 fluxum ex interna vi, et dominio, vel etiam ex eadem 205R By the same capacity, it can also do something else or do
facultate aliud, seu contrarium agendo, si ex parte a contrary thing, if on the part of the object a sufficient
obiecti suffi- <col. b> ciens propositio ad utrumque proposal of each option was made. Therefore, through that The phrase
‘once all the
prerequisites
have been
posited’ fills in
the definition
of freewill.
Particula,
positis
omnibus
requisitis,
complet
definitionem
liberi arbitrii.
facta sit. Per illam ergo particulam optime com- phrase the characterization of freewill is best filled in, not
pletur descriptio liberi arbitrii, non excludendo, vel by excluding or rejecting the other ones, but by explaining
215 reprobando alias, sed explicando, de qua potestate 210R of what power of acting it should be understood so that it
agendi intelligi debeant, ut bonae sint, utique de is good. It should certainly be understood of a proximate
potestate proxima, quae per se ad utramque partem power that through itself can turn to either option without
flecti possit sine mutatione status, ut sic dicam, per a change in its state (if I may call it that), through which
quam scilicet mutationem impotens ad agendum, change, namely, it is made unable to act or unable not to
220 vel non agendum fiat. 215R act.
Secunda
assertio.
Descriptio
libertatis in
sensu
composito est
intelligenda.
8. Secundo hinc dicimus, descriptionem illam 8. Second, from this we say that that characterization The 2nd
assertion: the
characteriza-
tion of freedom
should be
understood in
the composed
sense.
in sensu composito esse intelligendam, sicut ab om- should be understood in the composed sense, just as it is
nibus auctoribus, qui illam attigerunt, est intellecta. understood by all the authors who touch on it. This is easily
Et probatur facile, quia positis omnibus praerequisi- proven, because that something is able not to act in the
225 tis ad agendum, posse non agere in sensu diviso, id 220R divided sense once all the prerequisites for acting have been
est, retinere potestatem ad non agendum, ablata ali- posited—that is, that it retain the capacity for not acting with
qua conditione ex praerequisitis, non est proprium the removal of some condition among the prerequisites—is
potentiae liberae, sed cuilibet naturaliter agenti con- not the proprium of a free power but applies to anything
venit. Nam sol etiam ita illuminat, cum omnia req- acting naturally. For the sun also illuminates in that way
230 uisita concurrunt, ut possit non illuminare, si fen- 225R with all the prerequisites concurring, so that it is able not
estrae claudantur, et oculus videt obiectum impri- to illuminate if the windows are closed, and the eye sees
mens speciem, et aptus est ad carendum visione, si an object that is imprinting a species but is ready to lack
auferatur species: et intellectus ipse dum credit a that vision if the species is removed. And the intellect itself
voluntate motus potens est ad non credendum, si that believes as long as it is moved by the will is able not

-- 7 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 8
235 voluntas aut non moveat, aut in contrarium actum 230R to believe if the will either ceases to move it or inclines it
inclinet: non enim suam potentiam in actu primo, to some contrary act. For it does not lose its power in first
quam innatam habet ad utrumque actum, amittit, act that it has innately for either act when it is applied to
quando ad credendum per voluntatem applicatur: believing by the will. Therefore, once all the prerequisites
ergo positis omnibus requisitis est potentia non cre- have been posited, the power not to believe or to dissent
240 dendi, vel dissentiendi in sensu diviso: ergo id non 235R still exists in the divided sense. That, then, is not enough
est satis ad potentiam formaliter liberam: vel di- for a power to be formally free. Or it must be said that the
cendum est, intellectum esse potentiam formaliter intellect is a formally free power. But that is not true and is
liberam, quod nec verum est, neque a dictis auc- not granted by the mentioned authors. Therefore, in order to
toribus admittitur: ergo ut illis verbis formalis lib- explain the formal freedom of the will through those words,
245 ertas voluntatis explicetur, necesse est, ut in sensu 240R it is necessary that they be taken in the composed sense.
composito accipiantur.
Probatur ex
voluntate
beata.
9. Idem argumentum sumi potest ex ipsamet 9. The same argument can be taken from the will itself. It is proven
with reference
to the blessed
will.
voluntate: nam in beatitudine non libere, sed neces- For in the blessed state, the blessed do not love God freely
sario beatus amat Deum, quia positis praerequisitis but love him necessarily, since once the prerequisites for
250 ad illum amorem, non potest non amare in sensu that love have been posited, they cannot not love in the
composito, et nihilominus ibi etiam retinet potes- 245R composed sense, yet here also they retain the power not
tatem non amandi in sensu diviso: nam si visio ad to love in the divided sense. For if the vision that is a
illum amorem requisita auferatur, poterit voluntas prerequisite for that love were removed, the will would be
ab illo amore cessare; sicut in Paulo contigit, si in able to cease from that love (as happened in the case of Paul,
255	Evasionis
ventilatio.
raptu Deum vidit. Neque refert, quod illa necessitas if he saw God when he was taken up9). Nor is it relevant that Airing an
evasion.	aliunde proveniat, nimirum ex vi obiecti, et visio- 250R that necessity comes from a different source, namely, from
nis, quia nihilominus sub illa manet potestas ad the force of the object or of the vision, since, nevertheless,
non amandum in sensu diviso, et in hoc tantum the power not to love remains in the divided sense under
<13> fit aequiparatio. Deinde voluntas in actibus that necessity, and it is only about this that a comparison
260 indeliberatis, quales sunt etiam motus gratiae ex- is being made. In addition, the will acts from necessity
citantis, ex necessitate, et sine libertate operatur: 255R and without freedom in undeliberated acts of the kind to
quia positis praeviis requisitis ad illum actum, non which the motions of gratia excitans belong. For once all
potest actum continere, cum tamen in sensu di- the previous prerequisites for that act are posited, the will
viso possit ab illo cessare, ut constat. Quin potius cannot restrain that act, yet it can cease from it in the divided
265	Idem in brutis
probatur.
etiam in brutis idem genus indifferentiae invenire- sense, as is clear. In fact, the same kind of indifference can The same is
proven in the
case of brute
animals.
tur, possunt enim sponte sua, et moveri, et qui- 260R even be found in brute animals. For they can spontaneously
escere, et ad unam partem, et ad oppositum moveri. both move and rest, and move to one option and to the
Aristoteles. Propter quod dixit Aristoteles 8. Physicorum text. opposite option. For this reason Aristotle said in Physics Aristotle.
40. habere in seipsis moveri, et non moveri, et ideo VIII, text. 40, that they have it in themselves to move and
270 quando positis omnibus requisitis aliquid appetunt, not to move. And so when all the prerequisites for desiring
9See 1 Cor. 12:1–4.

-- 8 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 9
potestatem retinent ad cessandum ab illo appetitu, 265R something are posited, they retain the power in the divided
et ad contrarium appetendum in sensu diviso, id sense (that is, if one of those prerequisites is removed or
est, si aliquod ex illis praerequisitis auferatur, vel another different one is introduced) for ceasing from that
aliud diversum adhibeatur. Et nihilominus, quia desire and for desiring something contrary. Nevertheless,
275 positis praerequisitis ita ad unum determinantur, since once the prerequisites have been posited they are
ut in sensu composito, id est, illis stantibus, nec 270R determined to one thing in such a way that in the composed
aliud appetere, nec ab illo appetitu cessare valeant, sense (that is, with the prerequisites in place) they do not
S. Thomas. ideo sine libertate operantur. Unde D. Thomas q. 24. have the power to desire something else or to cease from
de Veritate art. 2. In brutis (ait) est quaedam simil- that desire, they operate without freedom. Hence St. Thomas St. Thomas.
280 itudo liberi arbitrii, in quantum possunt agere, vel says in On Truth, q. 24, art. 2: ‘There is a certain semblance
non agere unum, et idem, secundum suum iudicium, 275R of freewill in brute animals, insofar as they can, according
[. . . ] sed quia eorum iudicium est determinatum ad to their judgement, do or not do one and the same thing
unum, per consequens eorum appetitus, et actio ad . . . . But because their judgement is determined to one thing,
unum determinatur. Et in solutione ad 2. et 3. dicit their appetite and action are consequently also determined
285 esse in brutis quamdam indifferentiam actionum, to one thing.’ And in ad 2 and 3 he says that in brute animals
quia eorum potentia motiva non magis inclinatur ex 280R there is a certain indifference in their actions, since their
se ad unum motum, quam ad alium, et idem suo motive power is not of itself more inclined to one motion
modo esse in appetitu eorum, et tamen non esse than another and the same is true in its way with their
libertatem, quia posita apprehensione, et iudicio appetite. And yet they are not free, since they are determined
290 phantasiae, ad unum determinantur. Ex quibus to one course once the apprehension and the judgement of
verbis colligimus, necessarium esse ad libertatem, 285R imagination are posited. From these words we gather that it
ut stante eodem iudicio cum talibus praerequisitis is necessary for freedom that while standing with the same
tam actio, quam non actio sit in potestate agentis, judgement along with such prerequisites both the action and
nec satis esse, quod in eo sit potestas ad agendum, non-action are in the power of the agent. It is not enough
295 et non agendum, variato iudicio: nam hanc etiam that the power for acting and not acting be in it with changed
potestatem habent bruta: eadem autem ratio est de 290R judgements. For brute animals also have this power. The
caeteris praerequisitis, ut mox dicam. argument is the same, moreover, for the other prerequisites,
as I will say shortly.
Ratio
convincens.
10. Ratio denique hanc partem convincit, quia 10. Finally, reason establishes this part, since not just Establishing
reason.	non quaelibet potestas agendi, et non agendi ad any power for acting and not acting suffices for freedom,
300 libertatem sufficit, sed illa quae est ex interna potes- 295R but [only] that which results from an internal capacity and
tate, et eminenti virtute, ac dominio (ut in praece- eminent power and control (as I showed in the previous
denti capite declaravi:) at vero ita operari positis chapter). On the other hand, to operate in such a way that
omnibus requisitis ad agendum, ut solum possit fac- once all the prerequisites for acting have been posited the
ultas ab operatione cessare in sensu diviso, id est, faculty can only cease from operation in the divided sense—
305 sublato aliquo ex requisitis, non est posse cessare 300R that is, by removing something from the prerequisites—is not
ex interna potestate, et dominio actionis: ergo non to be able to cease by virtue of an internal power and control
satis est ad libertatem. Minor <col. b> probatur, over the action. Therefore, it is not enough for freedom. The

-- 9 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 10
quia tunc non cessatur ex potestate non agendi, sed minor is proven: for in that case it would not cease in virtue
potius ex impotentia agendi, quia nimirum nulla of a power for not acting but in virtue of an inability to act,
310 causa agere valet, nisi positis omnibus requisitis ad 305R namely, because no cause has the strength to act without
Confirmatio. agendum. Et confirmatur, quia alias postquam vol- all the prerequisites for acting having been posited.
untas positis omnibus praerequisitis velle incepit, It is confirmed, for otherwise after the will begins to will Confirmation.
non poterit sua sponte ab actuali voluntate ces- once all the prerequisites have been posited, it could not
sare, stantibus iisdem praerequisitis, sed oportebit spontaneously cease from the actual willing as long as the
315 aliquod illorum auferri, ut ipsa cesset; hoc autem 310R same prerequisites stand. It would be necessary that some-
est, et contra experientiam, et contra usum liber- thing be removed from the prerequisites in order to cease
tatis: ergo. Sequela probatur: nam eadem est ratio from that willing. But this is both contrary to experience and
de inceptione actus, et de perseverantia in illo: imo contrary to the use of freedom. Therefore. The consequence
aliqui existimant magis necessariam esse continua- is proven: for the reasoning is the same about the inception
320 tionem, quam inceptionem, saltem pro brevi morula, 315R of the act as about persevering in it. In fact, some people
quod nec verum est, nec nostra nunc refert: satis think the continuation is more necessary than the inception,
enim est, quod aequalis ratio intercedat. Si ergo at least for brief delays. This is neither true nor relevant
voluntas, stantibus omnibus praerequisitis ad per- for us at present. For it is enough that there be an equal
severandum, potest sua sponte, et interna vi ab reason. If, therefore, the will once all the prerequisites for
325 amando cessare, componendo simul illam cessa- 320R persevering have been posited can spontaneously and by
tionem cum illis praerequisitis, eadem profecto, vel an internal power cease from loving, by bringing together at
maiori ratione poterit non inchoare amorem, stan- the same time that cessation with those prerequisites, then
tibus omnibus praerequisitis, negationem agendi surely there is just as much reason or more that it could
cum eisdem praerequisitis simul componendo, vel not begin to love with all the prerequisites standing, but
330 si hoc posterius non potest, profecto nec illud prius 325R bringing together at the same time a negation of acting with
potest. Unde ulterius confirmatur a contrario, quia the same prerequisites. Or, if the latter is not possible, then
si positis illis praerequisitis non relinquitur potestas certainly the former is not possible either. Hence, it is further
non agendi in sensu composito, ergo ex potentia sic confirmed a contrario. For if with those prerequisites posited
constituta cum omnibus praerequisitis necessario the power not to act does not remain in the composed sense,
335 sequitur actio; ergo talis actio non est libera, cum 330R then the action necessarily follows from the power set up
ex necessitate sequatur ad potentiam antecedenter in that way with all the prerequisites. Therefore, such an
ad omnem usum libertatis ita dispositam, ut cum action is not free, since it follows of necessity on the power
tali dispositione non possit actionem continere, et in that condition antecedently to any use of freedom, so that
sine illa praeparatione non possit illam elicere. when it is in such a condition the power cannot hold back
335R the action and without that preparation cannot elicit it.
340	Ultima
confirmatio ex
absurdo
oppositae
sententiae.
Capreolus.
11. Tandem confirmatur, quia ex altera senten- 11. Finally, it is confirmed by the fact that it follows from The last
confirmation
from the
absurdity of
the opposite
view.
Capreolus.
tia sequitur, voluntatem nunquam habere poten- the other view that the will never has the proximate power to
tiam proximam agendi, et non agendi: consequens act and not to act. But the consequent is contrary to the use
332 si ] sic B.

-- 10 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 11
est contra libertatis usum: ergo. Sequela probatur, of freedom. Therefore. The consequence is proven: as Capre-
quia ut recte dixit Capreolus in 2. d. 28. q. 1. art. 3. 340R olus rightly said in II, d. 28, q. 1, art. 3, ad 2 and 3, against
345 ad 2. et 3. contra quartam conclusionem, potentia the fourth conclusion, that a power in the divided sense
in solo sensu diviso solum est potentia remota, et alone is only a remote power and that a proximate power
potentia proxima includit omnia requisita ad actum, includes all the prerequisites for the act, as we reported from
Potentia in
sensu diviso
est potentia
remota.
ut supra ex Scoto retulimus. Et probatur clare, Scotus above. It is clearly proven, for that which is called A power in the
divided sense
is a remote
power.
quia illa, quae dicitur potestas solum in sensu di- 345R a power only in the divided sense cannot be immediately
350 viso, non potest immediate reduci ad actum, sed reduced to act, but it is necessary that some condition or
oportet, ut praecedat aliqua dispositio, aut mutatio, change precede by which the power is rendered proximate,
qua potentia reddatur proxima, acquirendo aliquid by acquiring something necessary for the act or removing
necessarium ad actum, vel tollendo impedimentum something impeding the act. For example, a human being
actus, ut homo carens lumine gloriae dicitur potens 350R lacking the light of glory is said to be able to see God, not
355 ad videndum Deum, non in <14> sensu composito, in the composed sense but in the divided sense, that is, by
sed diviso, id est, ablata illa carentia, et ideo illa the removal of that lack, and for this reason that power is
potentia est remota: idemque in universum inveni- remote. The same thing is universally found in every act
etur in omni actu possibili in sensu tantum diviso. that is possible only in the divided sense. If, therefore, once
Si ergo voluntas positis omnibus praerequisitis ad 355R all the prerequisites for acting have been posited the will is
360 agendum, potest non agere tantum in sensu diviso, able not to act only in the divided sense, it is not in this case
non est tunc potentia proxima ad non agendum, sed a proximate power for not acting, but only a remote power.
tantum potentia remota. Et e contrario quando non Conversely, when it does not have all the prerequisites for
habet omnia praerequisita ad agendum, non est acting, it is not a proximate power for acting but only a re-
potentia proxima ad agendum, sed tantum remota, 360R mote power. Therefore, it is never a proximate power for both
365 nunquam ergo est potentia proxima ad agendum, acting and not acting, but only for one or the other. But the
et non agendum, sed ad alterum tantum. Minor minor or the falsity of the consequent is proven, for in this
autem, seu falsitas consequentis probatur, quia hoc way the true use of freedom is removed in the effect. For a
modo tollitur in effectu verus usus libertatis: quia remote power is not really exercised or reduced to act except
potestas remota revera non exercetur, nec reduci- 365R when constituted in a proximate state. For example, in order
370 tur in actum, nisi in statu proximo constituta, ut to be black a power that has white cannot be reduced to
potestas, quam habet album, ut sit nigrum, non re- act except the whiteness be removed. As long as that power
ducitur in actum, nisi ablata albedine, et quamdiu is under whiteness, it cannot exercise the act of the other
illa potentia est sub albedine, non exercet actum al- capacity. And so on for the other cases. Therefore, if the will
terius potestatis, et sic de aliis; ergo si voluntas nun- 370R is never in proximate power to both the act of doing and the
375 quam est in potentia proxima ad utrumque actum act of not doing, or to doing this or that, it never exercises a
agendi, et non agendi, vel agendi hoc, aut illud, nun- free power, since it only exercises that part to which it was
quam exercet potestatem liberam, quia solum eam proximately prepared. This is especially convincing if the
partem exercet, ad quam proxime est praeparata. matter is considered morally. For no use of freedom is given
346 solo ] om. V.

-- 11 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 12
Quod maxime urget, rem moraliter considerando: 375R unless when a lack of action can be imputed to the agent
380 quia non datur usus libertatis, nisi quando oper- and conversely. But a remote power that cannot be reduced
anti imputari potest carentia actionis, et e converso: to a proximate power through the will itself (that power in
at vero ad hoc non satis est potentia remota, quae the divided sense is of this sort) is not sufficient for this. For
non potest ad proximam reduci per ipsam volun- once all the prerequisites for acting that precede freedom
tatem, qualis est illa potestas in sensu diviso: quia 380R have been posited, it is not in the power of a human being
385 positis omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum, quae to bring those together with the lack of an action. Therefore,
antecedunt libertatem, non est in potestate hominis it cannot be imputed to him that in that case he did not
cum illis componere carentiam actionis: ergo non abstain from such an action. Therefore, the action itself also
potest illi imputari, quod tunc non abstineat a tali cannot be attributed to him as free, that is, as proceeding
actione: ergo nec actio ipsa illi potest tribui, tan- 385R from a control over acting and not acting. It is necessary,
390 quam libera, id est, tanquam procedens ex dominio then, to understand that characterization in the composed
agendi, et non agendi, ut ergo per illam descrip- sense in order for true freedom to be explained through it.
tionem vera libertas explicetur, oportet, ut in sensu
composito intelligatur.
Tertia assertio
subterfugia
praecludens.
12. Dico tertio, descriptionem intelligendam 12. I say, third: that characterization should be under- 3rd assertion,
precluding a
subterfuge.
395 esse de omnibus praerequisitis sive ex parte Dei, stood to be about all the prerequisites, whether on the part
sive ex parte aliarum causarum, et nisi ita intel- 390R of God or on the part of other causes. Unless understood in
ligatur, non satis definiri libertatem, ut in actum that way, it is not sufficient for defining freedom, so that it
liberum in ipso usu prodire possit. Haec assertio can advance to a free act from a use of that freedom. This
solum ponitur propter priorem partem: nam de al- assertion is only made on account of the first part, for the
400 tera non est controversia. Est autem iuxta mentem other part is not controversial. It is, moreover, according to
antiquorum doctorum, qui descriptionem illam tra- 395R the mind of the venerable doctors who handed down that
diderunt, vel ut certam supposuerunt; quia nec Dei characterization or assumed it as certain, since they do
concursum, aut voluntatem ab illa excipiunt, sed not remove either the will or the concursus of God from it.
pu- <col. b> tant, vel non pertinere ad illa praereq- Rather, they either think that those do not belong to those
405 uisita, vel si aliquo modo pertinet, cum illa, et aliis, prerequisites or, if they do belong in some way, both acting
ut antecedunt, posse componi tam agere, quam 400R and not acting taken individually can be brought together
non agere divisim sumpta, ut videre licet in Cor- with the concursus and the other prerequisites. This may
Corduba. duba supra, et aliis, quos ipse refert, et propterea be seen in Córdoba, cited above, and in others to whom he Córdoba.
dicere etiam solet non posse eundem effectum esse refers. For this reason it is also customary to say that the
410 simul evitabilem in ordine ad causam secundam, et same effect cannot be avoidable in relation to the secondary
Caietanus.
Waldensis.
Occam.
Gregorius.
Gabriel.
evitabilem in ordine ad primam, ut sentit Caietanus 405R cause and at the same time be avoidable in relation to the
1. p. q. 21. art. 4. et Waldensis lib. 1. Doctrinale first cause. Cajetan thinks this in [ST ] Ia.21.4, and Thomas Cajetan.
Netter of
Walden.
Ockham.
Gregory.
Gabriel.
fidei cap. 28. Occam in 1. d. 38. q. 1. Gregorius q. Netter of Walden in Doctrinale antiquitatum fidei ecclesiae
22. art. 3. Gabriel art. 2. Et propterea cum tota con- catholicae I, ch. 28, Ockham in I, d. 38, q. 1, Gregory in q.
415 troversia versetur circa concursum, vel motionem 22, art. 3, and Gabriel in art. 2. For this reason, since the
divinam, in illa sola limitare generalem assertionem, 410R entire controversy turns around the divine concursus or mo-

-- 12 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 13
videtur esse quaedam petitio principii, vel aperta tion, to limit the general assertion to that alone seems to be a
destructio, ac negatio illius axiomatis. Ratione idem kind of begging of the question, or a manifest destruction or
ostenditur, quia omnia, quae generaliter diximus negation of that axiom. The same is shown by reason, since
420 de praerequisitis ad agendum, aeque procedunt de everything that we said generally about the prerequisites for
omnibus, et singulis praerequisitis, sive ex parte 415R acting apply equally to each and every prerequisite—whether
Dei, sive ex parte aliarum rerum, vel causarum on the part of God or on the part of other things or causes
necessaria sint, et sive dicantur esse aliquid requi- that are necessary, and whether they are said to be some-
situm in ipsa voluntate, sive in intellectu, sive in thing prerequisite in the will itself or in the intellect or in
425 alia quacumque re, quae ipsam voluntatem moveat any other thing whatsoever that moves the will to acting, or
ad agendum, et sive talis motio dicatur esse pro- 420R whether such a motion is said to be a proper cause effecting
pria causa, efficiens volitionem, sive sit necessaria a volition or is a necessary condition without which such
conditio, sine qua non stet fieri talem actum, et, an act would not be in a position to come to be and with it
illa posita, non stet non fieri, dummodo sermo sem- having been posited the act would not be in a position not to
430 per sit de solis, et propriis praerequisitis, id est, come to be—as long as the discussion is always about the
ita requisitis, ut omnino praecedant aliquo modo 425R proper prerequisites alone, that is, prerequisites of such a
causalitate, et ordine naturae in causalitate fundato kind that in some way in causality and in the order of nature
usum liberum voluntatis: nam de concomitantibus, founded in causality they wholly precede the free use of the
quae involvunt liberum usum, non loquimur, ut will. For we are not talking about the concomitants that
435	Assumpti
probatio.
capite sequenti declarabimus. Assumptum ergo sic involve free use, as we will explain in the following chapter.
declaratum probatur specialiter de illo requisito ex 430R Thus explained, therefore, the assumption is proven The proof of
the
assumption.
parte Dei, quod a generali descriptione excipitur, et specifically with respect to the prerequisite on the part of
vocatur motio Dei. Nam si illa motio est unum ex God that is taken out of the general characterization and is
praerequisitis, et simpliciter necessaria, ut volun- called the motion of God. For if that motion is one of the
440 tas operetur, et illa posita non manet in voluntate prerequisites and necessary without qualification for the will
potestas ad non operandum, nisi in sensu diviso: 435R to operate and if once it is posited the power not to operate
ergo, illo praerequisito posito, non est voluntas in does not remain in the will except in the divided sense, then,
potentia proxima ad non operandum, sed tantum once that prerequisite has been posited, the will is not in
in remota, quia oportet prius illam motionem au- proximate potency for not acting but only in remote potency,
445 ferri ab illo, qui illam posuit: nam ipsa voluntas since it is necessary that that motion first be removed by
non potest illam auferre, quia sicut non fuit facta 440R him who posited it. For the will itself cannot remove it, since
ab illa, ita neque ab illa pendet, nisi ut a subiecto just as it was not made by the will, so also it does not depend
recipiente, in cuius potestate non est duratio pas- on the will except as on a receiving subject. The duration
sionis, sicut nec inceptio eius, ut cap. 2 probatum of a passion is not in the power of the receiving subject just
450 est: ergo illa potentia in sensu diviso non est potes- as the passion’s inception is not in its power, as was shown
tas ad liberum usum sufficiens, quia liber usus 445R in ch. 2. Therefore, that power in the divided sense is not
non est nisi a potestate proxima, ut etiam probavi. a power sufficient for free use, since there is no free use
<15> Ergo in voluntate sic mota non manet libertas except by a proximate power, as I also proved. Therefore,
non agendi, et consequenter neque ipsum operari the freedom not to act does not remain in a will moved in

-- 13 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 14
455 liberum est. Et eadem ratione quamdiu illa motio that way, and, consequently, neither is the acting itself free.
non datur voluntati, solum est in potentia remota, 450R For the same reason, as long as that motion is not given to
et ex parte receptiva ad agendum, quia oportet, ut the will, the will’s power to act is only remote and on the
prius recipiat illam motionem, quae non est in potes- receptive side. For it must first receive that motion, which
tate eius activa, sed receptiva tantum: ergo tunc is not in its active power but only in its receptive power.
460 non est in potestate libera non agendi, sed in ne- Therefore, then it is not in a free power to not act, but in
cessitate, et impotentia agendi. Ergo ut salvetur 455R necessity [to not act] and in an inability to act. Therefore,
libertas, etiam respectu divinae motionis praevia in order to save freedom even with respect to the previous
requisitae, necessarium est, ut illa etiam posita prerequisite of divine motion, it is necessary (since it is also
cum aliis praerequisitis, maneat potentia in sensu posited along with the other prerequisites) that the power for
465 composito ad agendum, et non agendum. acting and not acting remain in the composed sense.
A simili
confirmatio.
13. Confirmatur, et explicatur a simili de po- 460R 13. It is confirmed and explained by analogy to, for A confirmation
by analogy.	tentia, verbi gratia, scribendi, quae est in manu; example, the power of writing that is in the hand. For it of
illa enim de se est etiam potentia non scribendi, et itself is also the power not to write and yet is not free. For
nihilominus libera non est, quia nec potest scribere it can neither write without an action of the will nor can
470 sine actione voluntatis, nec posita motione volun- it in the composed sense not write when the motion of the
tatis, potest in sensu composito non scribere, licet 465R will is posited, although remotely and in the divided sense it
in sensu diviso, et remote possit, utique si voluntas can (at least if the will removes its motion). Therefore, in a
motionem auferat: ergo simili modo si voluntas non similar way if the will cannot will except when moved by God
potest velle nisi mota a Deo, et posita motione non and with that motion posited cannot compose an absence
475 potest cum illa componere carentiam volitionis, licet of volition with that motion (although in the divided sense,
in sensu diviso, id est, ablata motione, possit non 470R that is, with that motion removed, it could not will), it is no
velle, non magis est potentia libera, quam potentia more a free power than the moving power that is in the hand.
motiva, quae est in manu. Simile est de intellectu It is similar with the intellect with respect to the power of
quoad potentiam assentiendi, et dissentiendi per assenting or dissenting through faith. For it is not formally
480 fidem: nam in hoc non est formaliter liber, quia free in this, since it can neither assent except when moved by
nec assentit nisi motus a voluntate, neque si ab illa 475R the will nor can it in the composed sense fail to assent when
moveatur, potest non assentire in sensu composito, it is moved by the will, but only in the divided sense, which
sed in diviso: quae divisio (ut sic dicam) non est in division (if I may speak in this way) is not in its active power.
eius activa potestate. Ergo si ita comparatur volun- Therefore, if the will of a human being is related to the prior
485 tas hominis ad motionem Dei praeviam, ut sine illa motion of God in such a way that it cannot will without that
non possit velle, et illa posita non possit non velle 480R motion and once that motion is posited it cannot not will
nisi in sensu diviso, qui non est in eius potestate except in the divided sense (which is not in its active power),
activa, profecto non est magis libera voluntas, quam then surely the will is no more free than the intellect. For
intellectus, quia non potest ipsa active tollere mo- it cannot itself actively remove the motion of God just as it
490 tionem Dei, sicut non potest eam parere. Quid enim cannot produce it. For what difference does it make that one
455 motio ] ratio B.

-- 14 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 15
interest, quod una motio sit a voluntate creata, et 485R motion is from a created will and another from an uncreated
alia ab increata? profecto haec magis officit liber- will? Surely the latter blocks freedom more, since the motion
tati; quia motio voluntatis increatae efficacior est, of an uncreated will is more efficacious, deeper, and has
et intimior, magisque per se influens in effectum. more of a per se influx into the effect.
495	Adversantium
responsio.
14. Respondent constituendo discrimen, quia 14. They respond by setting up a distinction, since the The
adversaries’
response.
voluntas creata, licet sit mota a Deo, retinet in- 490R created will although it is moved by God retains the intrinsic
trinsecam potestatem non eliciendi talem actum, si power not to elicit such an act if it wills, a power that the
velit, quod non habet intellectus, nec alia potentia intellect and another naturally acting powers do not have.
Impugnatur. naturaliter agens. Sed hoc <col. b> non potest sat- But this cannot be satisfactory. First, because that intrinsic It is rejected.
500 isfacere. Primo, quia illa potestas intrinseca ad non power for not eliciting an act that is said to remain in the will
eliciendum actum, quae dicitur manere in voluntate 495R moved by God is a power for not eliciting the act either [i] in
mota a Deo, vel est ad non eliciendum actum in the composed sense, that is, by holding back the act without
sensu composito, id est, sustinendo actum non ob- hindering the motion and existing simultaneously with it—
stante motione, et illa simul stante: et in hoc sensu and the distinction is best in this sense, but then we are
505 optimum est discrimen, tamen per illum datur no- given everything that we intended—or [ii] that power exists
bis, quod intendimus. Vel illa potentia est tantum 500R in the divided sense only—and in that way it is surely the
in sensu diviso, et sic eadem profecto est in poten- same in the moving power [of the hand] and in the intellect.
tia motiva, et in intellectu, quia si motio voluntatis For if the motion of the will ceases, it is in accordance with
cesset, ex intrinseca natura talium potentiarum est, the intrinsic nature of such powers that they do not elicit
510 ut actum non eliciant, quia natura sua ita subor- the act, since by their nature they are subordinated to the
dinantur voluntati quoad tales actus, ut si ab illa 505R will with respect to such acts in such a way that they do
non applicentur, illos non eliciant, multo autem not elicit an act if they are not directed [to it] by the will.
magis dicitur pendere voluntas hominis ab actuali But much more is the will of a human being said to depend
applicatione, et praemotione Dei: ergo sub illa mo- on the actual application and premotion of God. Therefore,
515 tione non magis habet potentiam intrinsecam non the will no more has an intrinsic power not to will under
volendi, quam intellectus, vel manus sub motione 510R that motion than the intellect or hand [has such an intrinsic
voluntatis. Unde fit, ut sicut non posita motione vol- power] under the motion of the will.
untatis non solum potest intellectus non assentiri, The result is that just as in the case where the motion
vel manus non moveri, sed etiam necessario non of the will is not posited the intellect not only can not as-
520 assentit, nec movetur, ita iuxta illam sententiam sent and the hand not move but also necessarily does not
non posita motione Dei, voluntas necessario non 515R assent and not move, so also according to that view when
vult: ergo non vere dicitur in sensu diviso, id est, the motion of God is not posited the will necessarily does
ablata motione, posse non operari, si velit, sed di- not will. Therefore, it is not rightly said that in the divided
cendum est ablata motione necessario non operari. sense, that is, with the motion removed, it can not operate
525 Nam sicut non potest componi carentia operatio- if it wished. Rather, it should be said that with the motion
nis cum motione, ita non potest componi operatio 520R removed it necessarily does not operate. For just as the
493 increatae ] increata B.

-- 15 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 16
Elucidatur
similitudine.
cum carentia motionis. Declaratur a simili, nam absence of operation cannot be composed with the motion,
ablata cognitione non recte dicetur voluntas posse so also operation cannot be composed with the absence of
ab intrinseco carere volitione, si velit, sed dicen- motion.
530 dum potius est, non posse velle, et necessario non It is explained by analogy, for with the removal of cog- It is elucidated
by similarity.	velle: sed non minus necessaria est (iuxta illam 525R nition the will is not rightly said to be able intrinsically to
sententiam) ad volendum motio Dei, quam motio lose volition if it wills. It should be said, rather, that it is un-
intellectus: ergo in illo sensu diviso, id est, si mo- able to will and necessarily does not will. But (according to
tio Dei desit, non habet voluntas potestatem non that view) the motion of God is no less necessary for willing
535 operandi, si velit, sed est in potentia necessario non than the motion of the intellect is. Therefore, in that divided
volendi: quae (ut supra dicebam) est quaedam im- 530R sense—that is, if the motion of God is missing—the will does
potentia volendi. Quapropter illa particula, si velit, not have the power not to act if it wills, but it is in its power
nullo modo potest ibi locum habere, quia ablata mo- necessarily not to will, which (as I said earlier) is a kind of
tione Dei, non potest homo velle; ergo cum dicitur, inability to will.
540 si velit, ponitur conditio impossibilis. Aut enim illud, Therefore, that phrase ‘if it wills’ can in no way have
si velit, intelligitur de voluntate directe per actum 535R a place here, since with the motion of God removed, the
positivum volendi suspendere alium actum, et hoc human being cannot will. Therefore, to say ‘if it wills’ is
dici non potest, quia neque id est necessarium ad to posit an impossible condition. For either [i] ‘if it wills’
non agendum libere, ut est probabile, nec illud est is understood as the will directly through a positive act of
545 possibile in illo sensu diviso, id est, ablata motione willing suspending another act—and this cannot be said,
Dei; vel intelligitur de voluntate indirecta, et tunc 540R because it is not the case that it is necessary for freely not
supponi debet proxima potentia volendi, quae non acting, as is probable, nor is that possible in that divided
est sine motione <16> Dei, quia adhuc voluntas est sense, that is, with the motion of God removed—or [ii] it
ex parte in potentia tantum receptiva: ergo tunc non is understood about the will indirectly and then one must
550 habet locum conditio, si velit, quia non voluntarie, assume a proximate power for willing. Such a power does
sed necessario caret voluntatis actu, quia a Deo non 545R not exist without the motion of God, since thus far the will is
movetur. in part only a receptive power. Therefore, then, the condition
‘if it wills’ has no place. For the act of will is absent not
voluntarily but necessarily, since it is not moved by God.
15. Est igitur eadem ratio de quolibet requi- 15. There is, therefore, the same argument concerning
sito ex parte Dei, quae est de aliis causis. Nam si 550R any prerequisite on the part of God that there is concerning
555 tale est requisitum ex parte Dei, ut cum illo non any other cause. For if the prerequisite on the part of God
sit potentia non agendi nisi in sensu diviso, revera is such that when it is present there is no power for not
non est potentia suspendendi volitionem per intrin- acting except in a divided sense, then there really is no
secum dominium in illam, sed per quamdam im- power for suspending volition through an intrinsic dominion
potentiam, quia si auferatur illud requisitum, sine 555R in it but only through a kind of impotency. For if that
560 illo non potest velle, sicut non potest operari sine prerequisite is removed the will cannot will without it, just
concursu Dei. Et similiter potentia illa in sensu di- as it cannot operate without the concursus of God. Likewise,
viso, etiamsi sit respectu praemotionis necessariae that power in the divided sense, even if it is with respect to

-- 16 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 17
ex parte Dei, est tantum potentia remota, quia debet a necessary premotion on the part of God, is only a remote
prius auferri motio Dei, ut talis potentia reducatur 560R power, because the motion of God must first be removed so
565 in actum non volendi, et auferre illam motionem that such a power is reduced into the act of not willing, and
non est in potestate ipsius voluntatis, quia ad il- to remove that motion is not in the power of the will itself
lam solum passive se habet. Unde etiam hic habet since it is related to that only in a passive way.
locum illa ratio, quod nec possit imputari homini Hence, here also is a place for that argument that the
carentia volitionis, quando non recipit motionem 565R absence of a volition cannot be imputed to a human being
570 Dei, quia ante motionem non est in potentia prox- when they did not receive the motion of God. For before the
ima, et non habet in sua potestate motionem, per motion they are not in proximate potency and do not have
quam in proxima potentia constituatur, sed solum in their power the motion through which to be placed in
est ad illam in potentia passiva, et ita non potest proximate potency but are only in passive potency to that
illi imputari, quod illam non habeat, et post mo- 570R motion. And thus what they do not have cannot be imputed
575 tionem non potest voluntati moraliter tribui, quod to them. After the motion, not suspending the act or not
actum non suspendat, vel quod suum influxum non containing its influx cannot be morally imputed to the will,
contineat, quia posita motione non potest, et illa since once the motion is posited the will cannot [suspend
motio ponitur sine influxu eius. Ergo ad veram lib- the act] and that motion is posited without its influx.
ertatem salvandam sensus compositus universaliter, 575R Therefore, in order to save true freedom the composed
580 et sine exceptione necessarius est respectu omnium, sense is universally and without exception necessary with
quae proprie sunt praerequisita ad agendum, sive respect to everything that is properly a prerequisite for acting,
ex parte causarum secundarum, sive ipsius Dei. whether on the part of secondary causes or on the part of
God.
Opposito
fundamento fit
satis.
16. Ad fundamentum contrariae sententiae, 580R 16. In response to the foundation of the contrary view, The
foundation of
the opposing
view is
satisfied.
negamus priorem partem de concursu praevio, suf- we deny the first part concerning the previous concursus.
585 ficit enim simultaneus, qui ut in re ipsa datus non For a simultaneous one suffices, which as it is given in the
est ex praerequisitis ad volendum, sed est con- thing itself is not among the prerequisites for willing but is a
comitans, et cum illo involvitur usus libertatis. Ut concomitant. With that the use of freedom is involved. But
vero est tantum in actu primo, est ex praerequisi- 585R insofar as it is only in first act, it is among the prerequisites.
tis: verumtamen cum illo in eo statu posito, seu Nevertheless, when in that state it is posited or offered on
590 oblato ex parte Dei, potest simul componi carentia the part of God, it can at the same time be composed with
actus, ad quem supponitur concursus in actu primo the absence of the act for which the offered concursus in the
oblatus. Et eodem modo dicendum est ad alteram first act is presupposed.
partem de voluntate Dei. Concedimus enim aliquam 590R The same thing should be said about the other part
voluntatem Dei esse praeviam ad volitionem homi- concerning the will of God. For we concede that some willing
595 nis, et nihilominus dicimus cum illa posse simul of God is prior to the human being’s volition, and yet we say
componi, tam non agere, quam age- <col. b> re, that at the same time not to act and to act can be composed
quia non oportet, ut sit voluntas absoluta, quod with that willing, since it is not necessary for there to be
talis actus fiat, et in rerum natura ponatur, ut recte 595R an absolute willing that such an act occur and be posited
Soto. dixit Soto 1. de Natura et gratia cap. 16. sed sufficit in rerum natura, as Soto rightly says in De natura et gratia

-- 17 of 18 --

Suárez, De gratia, proleg. 1, cap. 3 18
600 voluntas includens aliquam conditionem, nimirum I, ch. 16. Rather, a willing that includes some condition—
voluntas concurrendi cum libero arbitrio hominis namely, a willing concurring with the freewill of a human
ad hunc, vel illum actum, si ipse cooperari velit, being to this or that act if he himself wills to cooperate, which
quod semper reIinquitur in manu, et potestate eius. 600R always remains in his hand and in his power—is sufficient.
Unde merito graves Theologi dixerunt, licet volun- For this reason the important theologians rightly said that
605 tas Dei ex aeternitate antecedat, nihilominus voli- although the will of God precede from eternity, nevertheless,
tionem eius, ut determinatur ad volendum concur- its volition as it is determined to willing to concur with a
rere cum voluntate creata ad talem actum, non esse created will to such an act is not a preceding willing but a
voluntatem praecedentem sed concomitantem. Haec 605R concomitant one. But this concomitance seems to consist in
autem concomitantia videtur consistere in obiecto the object of that divine will, by which it wills to concur with
610 illius voluntatis divinae, qua vult concurrere cum a human will. For it does not will the act of the human will
humana, quia per illam volitionem non vult actum without qualification and absolutely through that volition,
voluntatis humanae simpliciter, et absolute, sed but wills it as coeffecting with the human will and, as it
ut coefficiendum ab eadem voluntate humana et 610R were, under the condition ‘if the human will itself wills to
quasi sub conditione, si voluntas ipsa humana velit cooperate’. For this reason such a willing by God cannot
615 cooperari, et ideo talis voluntas Dei nihil operatur perform anything through itself alone nor before the created
per se sola, neque prius, quam voluntas creata, will simultaneously brings about the effect. And thus it is
simul efficiat, et ita facile intelligitur, quomodo illae easily understood how those two wills are simultaneously
duae voluntates simul coniungantur ad eamdem 615R conjoined to the same action. For the divine will is prepared,
actionem, nam voluntas divina ex aeternitate est as it were, from eternity and has its power applied to co-
620 quasi praeparata, et habet applicatam potentiam acting with the human will. Hence, when in the temporal
suam ad coagendum cum voluntate humana. Unde order the human will through its freedom is conjoined to the
quando in tempore voluntas humana pro libertate divine will, they together bring about the effect.
sua coniungitur divinae, simul efficiunt.
600–601 includens aliquam conditionem, nimirum voluntas ] om. V.
610 qua ] quia B.

-- 18 of 18 --
