Last revision: December 30, 2015
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE GENERATIONE ET CORRUPTIONE 1.11
© Sydney Penner 2015
<f. 1r>2
PREFATORY QUESTION.
Whether these books have an object.
Different things please different authors in assigning an ob-
ject to this science.
For Alexander and Philoponus want the object of this science
to be generation and corruption, since that is how the books
describe it.
But other authors, who say that the object of the science
in De caelo is simple body, say that the object of this science is
mixed body.
On the other hand, St. Thomas and Albert the Great want
the object to be being mobile to form (ens mobile ad formam).
Moreover, through “being mobile to form” they understand being
that is generable, augmentable, and alterable. Through “form”
they understand something inhering intrinsically, which can per
se be the terminus of motion. But in an object of this kind the
name must abstract from terminatively and subjectively mobile
being. For being that is mobile to substantial form is terminative
but being that is mobile to accidental form is subjective.
Nevertheless if we consider what is said in the remaining parts
of Physics, <f. 1v> the object of this science is easily discovered.
I say, therefore: the object is generable being or body.
This can be gathered from what was said, for the adequate
object of physics is being that is mobile according to its sub-
stance and essential principles, not according to some property
(passionem) or accident. Rather, the latter are demonstrated in
philosophy of its object.
1Translation is based on Salvador Castellote’s transcription (available at
http://www.salvadorcastellote.com/investigacion.htm.
2Numbers in angle brackets are the manuscript page numbers included in
Professor Castellote’s transcription.

-- 1 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 2
As a result mobile being in general is assigned as the object
of physics. But the assigning of objects for the other parts of phi-
losophy must be done according to the essential division of those
kinds into their species having different knowable abstractions.
Moreover, the first division of mobile being is more suitable for
dividing sciences. It is that by which it is divided into generable
and ingenerable body. For these two members have different
knowable rationes, as we explained in [our lectures on] the first
book of the Posterior Analytics.
Therefore, just as the object of the science of the heavens was
assigned as ingenerable body, so consequently generable body
should be assigned as the object of this science. It will become
more evident while refuting the views already presented.
The first of those views has no probability. For just as physics
does not concern motion as an object but as a property of an
object, so also no part of physics primarily concerns motion or
change as an object. Rather, it primarily concerns being as that
which is ordered to such motion. Nor does the argument from
the title of the books carry any weight, since a book is not always
titled after its object, as is clear in the case of Physics.
The second opinion is easily excluded, since just as the object
of the books De caelo is not simple being, so also this object
is not mixed body, as will be clear from the discussion of this
doctrine. For a large part of it is occupied with the cognition of
the elements. For this reason, <f. 2> it should be taken from
abstraction. For the heavens have per se an abstraction sufficient
for constituting one science, and for this reason the science of
the heavens does not mix into its object any other things or
things brought in by simple bodies.3 In general, it has some
common properties applying to every simple body, through which
it is necessary to constitute a special science about it, especially
since the substantial principles of generable simple bodies are
physically entirely distinct and have a very different abstraction.
On the other hand, the principles of simple and mixed gener-
able things are very much the same, for they agree in a common
matter and in a common ratio of form. For this reason a division
of physics is much more suitable if it is into one science about
ingenerable body and another one about generable body.
The third opinion, moreover, either differs only in name from
ours or is not true. For when “being mobile to form” is said, one
3The Latin of the last part of this sentence (“neque illatas corporis simplicis”)
puzzles me. I suspect there is a textual problem.

-- 2 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 3
either understands that the very proximate disposition to form is
the formal ratio of the object of this science or one understands
that being having such an essence (so that a disposition to those
motions flows from it) is the object as such. The former is false.
For just as the object of physics is not mobile being as it expresses
a property but as it expresses the ratio of a property, so also one
should not assign some property of some natural being as the
formal object of any part of physics. The latter [interpretation]
differs only in name from our view. For every generable being has
an essence of this kind.
But so far “being mobile to form” in this sense does not
properly assign an object to this science.
First, because heaven is a being mobile to form. For it
assumes and acquires perfective qualities. Hence, something
should be added <f. 2v> to exclude heaven.
Second, because this view presupposes another: namely, that
the division of these objects should be taken from the division of
motion, and so far that being mobile to where is the object of the
books De caelo. Yet we will not disprove this here.
Third, because these words suggest that this science only
considers in the subject a disposition for a motion tending to a
form. And this is the meaning of speaking in that way. Yet this
is false. For it belongs to the sciences to consider every property
(proprietates) of a generable thing, as well as its principles and
causes, the number and mixtures of elements, and many other
things that are brought to light in the progression of science.
And it is proven by reason:
Because generable being according to its nature is material
being. Therefore.
Because a science considering some object considers all its
properties and not only those three motions.
It is confirmed: for if it belongs to this science to deal with
generable being according to its precise disposition for those
motions, then there must be one part dealing with substance
and another part with its properties. But there is no such part.
Therefore.
But so far the arguments are against our view.
It is argued, first: Science must be of incorruptible and
perpetual things. Therefore, it cannot be of generable things.
It is argued, second: This science proves that there is genera-
tion. Therefore, there must also be a generable thing. Therefore,
this cannot be its object, because there is no science that proves

-- 3 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 4
its own object to be.
It is argued, third: The object of physics as a whole is mobile
being. Therefore, the object of a part of physics must be a mobile
being of that sort, namely, mobile to form. For the object of a
part must be proportionate to the object of the whole.
It is argued, fourth: For if generable being is the object, then
any <f. 3> generable being whatever belongs to this science’s
consideration. Every animate thing, therefore, [belongs to this
science’s consideration]. But this is false.
It is argued, fifth: What is dealt with in these books [of Aristo-
tle’s Physics] is not generable being, but generation, corruption,
alteration, and augmentation.
I respond to the first argument in the same way as the similar
response in the beginning of the Physics: corruptible things have
properties that apply to them and that can be demonstrated
of them. It is not necessary that the object of a science be
incorruptible. Rather, the demonstrated propositions must hold
forever and be necessary. Their subject can be the object of a
science, since they abstract from existence.
To the second argument, it is responded that a science can
show a posteriori of something that its object exists.
It is said, second, that it cannot show that there is generation,
but it can show what it is and in what way it is distinguished
from alteration.
It is said, third, that generation is not the subject, but is
the way to produce it. Being generable is a property of the
subject. Hence, to demonstrate that there is generation is not to
demonstrate that the subject is. Rather, this is to show a property
(passionem) of the subject, which is proper to science.
To the third argument, it is responded that generable being is
included under subjectively mobile being, and this is the required
proportion between the object of the part and of the whole. For
just as mobile being is not taken for an aptitude but rather
for describing an essential difference of material being, so also
generable being does not imply properties but rather is taken for
describing an essential difference of material being from which
an aptitude for coming under generation and corruption.
The fourth argument asks that we explain how far <f. 3v>
the treatment of this science extends.
To this it should be replied that a science dealing with a
generic ratio deals with the specific rationes contained under the
generic ratio as long as they are included in the same knowable

-- 4 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 5
abstraction. Animate things, therefore, are included in the object
of this science under the common ratio of generable and mixed
being, but not under their proper ratio of animate being. For
being animate adds a grade of a higher ratio and therefore is
under another abstraction, as is clear from what was said in
the Posterior Analytics I. On the other hand, all inanimate beings
are included under their proper rationes in the object of this
science, since they are all in the same grade of being and have
their activity in the same way concerning matter.
It belongs to this science, therefore, to deal with generable
being in general and with its properties (passionibus), with the
elements, with mixtures of them, and with inanimate mixtures.
Hence, these books and the books of Meteorology (in which
imperfect mixtures are discussed) make one science. Any trea-
tise dealing with the cognition of inanimate mixtures, such as
of minerals—about which Albert the Great composed a special
book—and similar things, also belongs to the same science.
The fifth argument asks us to explain the order of speaking.
Here it should be noted, first, that two things belong to
science. The first is to explain the principles and causes of the
object. The second is to demonstrate the properties of the object.
And these two things should be done in this science concerning
its designated object.
Second, it should be noted that the principles and causes
of generable being are already entirely known from what was
said about these in Physics, where we explained the principles
of natural things, <f. 4> which are the same as the principles of
generable things. In fact, as we noted there, the principles were
explained there in the particular case of generable things because
those are better-known to us.
For this reason, then, Aristotle does not repeat the treatment
of matter and form, but only deals with substantial generation
and motions, which are proper to generable things, and deals
with elements and mixtures of them.
Therefore, the order to be kept is this:
First, we will deal with generable being and its generation.
Next, second, with its two affections, namely, alteration and
augmentation. For nothing remains that should now be said
about motion and its other properties.
But after this, third, in dividing generable being into sim-
ple and mixed, we will talk about simple bodies (which are the
elements).

-- 5 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 6
Finally, in the last place we will talk about mixture and the
mixed things themselves.
Note, then, that this science will contain five or six disputa-
tions: first about generable being and its generation, the second
about alteration, the third about augmentation, the fourth about
the elements, the fifth about mixture and mixed things in general,
and in the sixth part we will say a little about mixed things in
particular.
In this way this matter will be brought to a close. A different
order will not be followed because the one proposed seems more
agreeable. Nevertheless, we will always note the place in the
Physics. A literal commentary on the books of On Generation
and Corruption will remain from going through the disputations,
insofar as it seems necessary for fully acquiring this science.

-- 6 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 7
DISPUTATION I.
On Substantial Generation.
Natural beings and especially generable beings are cognized by
us throught mutual transmutation. For this reason, in dealing
with generable beings one should deal with their generation and
the converse. For one is cognized from the other. In fact, since
generation is better known to us, Aristotle deals especially with it
and investigates the one principle of generable being through it.
Therefore, we set up this disputation about substantial gen-
eration.
Aristotle discusses this material in the first four chapters.
In the first two he refutes the opinion of others, and then he
presents his own opinion. His opinion seems to include these
conclusions:
First conclusion: Substantial generation is possible, for it
comes from not being in actuality but being in potentiality.
Second conclusion: The generation of one being is the corrup-
tion of another. For this reason generations can always endure.
Third conclusion: Generation can be simpliciter or with qual-
ification. The former is generation of a substance, but the latter
of an accident.
Fourth conclusion: Among substantial [generations], some
are generations simpliciter (as when a more perfect substance
is generated from less perfect substances) and some are with
qualification (which is the contrary mode). The same is the case
in its way with the generation of accidents.
Fifth conclusion: Generation precedes corruption and cor-
ruption follows generation.
Sixth conclusion: Matter that is generated is subjected. For
it is a being if related to termini.
Seventh conclusion: Generated and corrupted matter must
be the same simpliciter, insofar as it is subject to each form.
Nevertheless, in a qualified way it is otherwise insofar as it has
different being <f. 5> under different forms.
These are held up to the third chapter.
Eighth conclusion: Generation differs from alteration in that
there is generation when a whole is changed to another whole
with nothing sensible remaining. But there is alteration when an
enduring sensible object changes in its affections.
This is from the fourth chapter.

-- 7 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 8
Quidditative cognition of generation and of a generable thing
depends on the cognition of principles and causes. We discussed
these more thoroughly in Physics I, and therefore only a few
things should be added, not repeating any of the things already
said.

-- 8 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 9
QUESTION I.
Whether there is substantial generation and corruption and what
it is.
Physics I settles this question in the question on the principle
in general, where we show that matter and substantial form
must necessarily be given. For the conclusion to this question is
gathered from that principle.
First conclusion: Substantial generation is given in things.
This is shown from the composition of matter found in these
things. For given that these things differ in their substantial
forms, it is therefore evident that, if one is transmuted into an-
other, there must be transmutation with respect to substantial
form and that this thing—for example, a horse—must be sub-
stantially generated and another thing be corrupted.
Since, therefore, it is obvious that one thing is transmuted
into another, it is also clear that there is substantial generation.
Hence the ancients who did not recognize physical composi-
tion from a subject and accidents <f. 5v> for that reason also did
not admit substantial generation.
Wherefore, to the extent that it is evident that there is matter
and form in generable things, it is also evident that there is
substantial generation.
But someone will say that it does not follow from having
posited such substantial composition that such substantial gen-
eration is possible, as is clear from the case of the heavens.
It is responded that although generation cannot be imme-
diately inferred from substantial composition alone, [it can be
inferred] once experience of sensibles has been assumed, namely,
that fire turns into water and water into air.
From this it can clearly be gathered that transmutation does
not happen from accidents alone but also from forms constituting
a thing in substantial being.
Therefore, Aristotle uses another argument here in chapter
1, confirming that there is generation: namely, that if generation
is not possible, then alteration is also not possible. But the
consequent is false. Therefore.
But that conditional seems false. For that which is prior is
not removed by that which is posterior having been removed. But
alteration is prior to generation. Therefore.
And it is confirmed: for in the heavens there is alteration but
not generation.

-- 9 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 10
It is confirmed, second: for if we understood the substance
of all things to be one, if there were a difference in qualities, we
could understand alteration to be possible without generation,
as one human being alters another human being although not
generating him.
To this it is replied that Aristotle’s argument seems to be ad
hominem, granting what was said by the ancients, for it is not
absolutely efficacious in proving that there is substantial genera-
tion. For those who deny it consequently deny that alteration is
ordered to substantial generation.4 Rather, [they say it is ordered
to] accidental generation.
Second, nevertheless, it is said that that proposition is true.
For which <f. 6> it should be noted that there are certain
qualities by the positing of which the union of matter and form is
necessarily dissolved.
From this it is gathered that these qualities by their very
nature are disposed, instituted, I say, for disposing matter to
receive a substantial form.
That conditional proposition, then, should be understood to
be about alteration tending to qualities of this sort. And it is
verified about those: for such alteration of its nature is ordered
to substantial generation just as to an ultimate end, although
an extrinsic one. Therefore, just as with the removal of an end
all the things that are ordered to the end are removed, so also
with the removal of substantial generation alteration is removed.
For alteration, although it is posterior in the order of execution,
nevertheless is prior in the order of intention. Hence, since
generation is impossible, alteration disposing matter to receiving
the form of the heavens is also impossible.
This is finally confirmed. For these qualities depend intrin-
sically on substantial form. Therefore, they cannot be admitted
without a change of substantial forms. Therefore, if transmuta-
tion with respect to substantial forms is impossible, transmuta-
tion according to these properties is also impossible.
You will say that remission of these qualities will at least be
possible, which is also proper alteration.
To the contrary, for remission tends to total destruction.
Therefore, if the latter is not possible, neither is the former.
But to the contrary, for it does not follow from there not being
generation that there is no alteration. Therefore, it also does not
4Castellote emended this sentence with the addition of a ‘non’; I omit it.

-- 10 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 11
follow from generation not being possible that alteration is not
possible.
It is responded by denying the consequent. For they are
related just as means and end. But from the positing of a means,
the end does not follow at once. But if an end were not possible,
neither would a means be possible.
This is how it is explained by Avicenna in this place; by Giles
of Rome in IX, 3, dub. 2; by Marsilius in q. 4; and by [Paul of]
Venice in Summa c. 13, q. 3, concl. 2.
The second conclusion follows from these things: Generation
is change <f. 6v> from non-being simpliciter to being simpliciter
and corruption the converse.
Moreover, through “being simpliciter” is understood a com-
plete substantial being. Generation and corruption are distin-
guished through this from other changes that are accidental.
Moreover, it is called change as distinct from creation.
And this is the same as what Aristotle says in his definition:
“generation is a change of this whole into that whole,” that is of
this substance into another substance. This should not be under-
stood in such a way that the whole substance is transmutated so
that nothing of it remains under any form, namely, generated and
corrupted. Rather, it is said that the whole is changed because an
absolutely whole substance is generated and a whole substance
is corrupted.
(That the words “no sensible” are rightly introduced will be
seen in q. 4.)
But it is argued against this definition: for it follows from
this definition that true substantial generation is involved in the
creation of the heavens.
This is clear in this way: for there is a true union of mat-
ter with form in the case of the heavens. Therefore, one first
understands matter, to which the form that is educed from its
potentiality advenes. Such a change, then, is generation.
It is responded that in the case of the heavens there is only
one action by which the form is created and communicated to the
whole. For the matter and form of the heavens are not created
except as united. Hence, one should not imagine one action that
produces the matter and another action that educes the form
from a potentiality of the matter. Rather, the heavens are created
by one action, both the parts with their mutual union and the
dependency of one on the other. But that action does not count
as generation, since it does not come about from a presupposed

-- 11 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 12
subject.
So far some doubts remain here, however.
The first is how some substantial generations can be sim-
pliciter and others with qualification. For every substances is a
being simpliciter. Therefore, every generation of a substance is a
generation simpliciter. Likewise with corruption.
It is responded that the question in fact only concerns names.
Hence, it is said <f. 7> that in the same way in which a
substance is called a being simpliciter its production is also a
generation simpliciter. Nevertheless, Aristotle’s way of speaking
holds true with respect to a certain comparison. For if that which
is less perfect is compared to that which is more perfect, the
former is as it were a non-being. And to aqcquire an imperfect
thing with the loss of a perfection is, simpliciter, not to acquire
but to lose. In that way of speaking, then, when a more imperfect
thing begins to exist as a result of the corruption of a more
perfect thing, it is not deemed a generation simpliciter but rather
a corruption. For that which was lost is better than that which
was acquired.
The second doubt concerns how the generation of one sub-
stance is the corruption of another when they have different
definitions.
It is responded that the sense is that whenever one form is
introduced to one matter, a contrary form must be expelled.
The reason is that the matter can neither have multiple forms
nor have no forms.
Hence, it is not necessary for the truth of that proposition
that only one thing be generated as a result of the corruption
of one thing. It is possible that multiple things be generated, if
different forms are induced in different parts of the matter. It is
also possible for one thing to be generated from the corruption of
multiple things, if the same form is induced in all of the matter
[of those things].
An example of each is when a mixture is resolved into its
elements and when a mixture is generated from mixing elements.
Strictly speaking, it is not necessary that some thing simpliciter
be generated from a corrupted thing nor that a new form be
educed from a potentiality of the matter. Rather, it is sufficient
that some form be introduced into that matter, whether through
generation or through aggeneration, as happens with the inges-
tion of food, which is converted into the substance of the one
being nourished.

-- 12 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 13
From these things it follows:
First, that the sense of that proposition is causal and not
formal. For generation and corruptions are different changes, yet
one comes about as a result of the other.
And this is the sense <f. 7v> of the proposition, which is
also annotated in the Physics. It is also the common sense of
the doctors: Giles of Rome, Marsilius, Albert, and Nifo here; St.
Thomas in II, dist. 34, art. 2, and De veritate q. 29, art. 2 and
6 in the body, and ST I.94.1 ad 5; Cajetan in II.13.6 ad 2, and
Ferrariensis in SCG II.
But enough has been said about this in its place.
Second, it follows that that proposition is verified in the case
of substantial generation and corruption but not in the case of
alteration. For it is possible to acquire a quality without losing
another. The proposition can, however, be verified in the case of
those alterations which happen between contraries. For [in those
cases] the introduction of one quality is the exclusion of another
thing.
But there is a third doubt. If generation and corruption follow
on each other, which of them is prior? Which is posterior?
For Aristotle seems to grant that generation comes about as
a result of corruption and that corruption is prior.
The contrary, however, seems to be true: generation and
corruption are simultaneous in time. For in the same measure in
which the generated thing begins, the corrupted thing ceases to
be. The first being of the generated thing is the first non-being of
the corrupted thing.
Nor is it necessary to grant another instant in which the thing
is, whatever Giles of Rome may say. To refer to his opinion would
take too log. For he says that for any thing whatever there is given
a duration of intrinsic being in which there is given an instant in
which the thing first is and another of cessation in which it last
is.5 From this it clearly follows that in that instant the matter
has two forms.
That argument suffices for opposing this opinion. Generation
and corruption, then, exist in the same instant, for the first
instant of non-being for the corrupted thing is the first instant of
being for the generated thing. For corruption is like a privation in
becoming and is not a positive change, as was said elsewhere.
5It is unclear to me how to read the Latin of this sentence: “Dicit enim quod
in quacumque re datur duratio intrinseci esse in qua datur instans in quo primo
fit, et aliud desitionis in quo ultimo sit.”

-- 13 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 14
By reason of this simultaneity, it is said that generated things
and corrupted things are contiguous in duration. This contiguity
does not consist in the fact that they are simultaneous but in the
fact that one immediately follows after the other, as we said.
Second, we say that generation is prior by nature to corrup-
tion and the contrary in different genera of causes. For generation
is prior in the genera of efficient and formal causes. The agent
causes the corruption through generation as through a first ac-
tion, and the form of the produced thing formally expells the
form of the corrupted thing. On the other hand, in the genus
of dispositive cause, which is reduced to the material [cause],
corruption is prior to generation. In order to introduce a form
a necessary disposition, as it were, of the matter is the expul-
sion of the other form, which in a certain way happens through
preceding dispositions.
For more about this, see q. 4.
From these things a fourth doubt is resolved, which here
can be whether the power to generate is introduced in the na-
ture on account of corruption or whether, the other way around,
corruption is followed per accidens.
There is a reason for doubting. It seems to be for this reason
that natures are not lacking the power to generate things similar
to themselves, because otherwise they could not conserve the
species without a succession of individuals on account of their
corruptibility.
Hence we see that a power of this kind is not attributed to
incorruptible things.
From this it seems to follow that such a power to generate is
introduced in order to restore the nature from corruption. <f. 8>
But the contrary is the case. Corruption follows per accidens
from the generation of another thing. Therefore, the power to
generate is prior to corruptibility. For this reason, such a power
is not given in order to repair the harm of corruption. Rather,
that evil follows per accidens on that good [of generation].
It is responded, first, that a power of this kind was introduced
to nature on account of the good that is bestowed to nature itself.
For it is essentially good to act and communicate its perfection.
Corruption follows per accidens from this beyond the intention of
nature.
Second, it was introduced on account of a kind of imperfec-
tion in the ratio of being generable, namely, because the perfec-
tion of the whole species shines perfectly in one individual, but

-- 14 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 15
it is maximally shown in the multiplication of individuals and
in their diverse perfection, in the miraculous way in which one
thing generates something similar to itself.
But an incorruptible thing does not need the power to gener-
ate, since the species is more perfectly represented in any given
individual, nor can such a power be conferred on it by reason of
its incorruptibility.
Third, a power of this kind was introduced so that corruptible
things can be perpetuated. For considering the nature of those
things intrinsically, they have a dissoluble composition and for
that reason are corruptible of themselves (having set aside the
relation to generations).
A human being is corruptible because the form is united to
matter through dispositions which can be lost—we understand
corrupted—even apart from the generation of another human
being, as when a man kills himself, not because death tends
to the introduction of another form, but because it removes the
disposition necessary for the conservation of the human being.
For these reasons, then, the power of generating is introduced
into nature. But the power to corrupt and corruptibility itself
were not directly intended by nature, but followed per accidens
from the imperfection of nature.
From these things, the last doubt is resolved, namely,
whether corruption is natural or preternatural. It should be
said that in attending to the natural order of things and of the
whole universe, corruption can be called natural, since it nec-
essarily follows in nature. But if the inclination of the natural
thing that is corrupted is considered, corruption is absolutely
preternatural.
But to the contrary. For Aristotle in Physics IX and Of Meteors
I divides corruption into natural and violent corruptions and
divides generation likewise.
It is replied, however, that with natural things and especially
with living things, generations and corruptions have determinate
periods. For a human being is generated after forty days after
insemination, is born after nine months, and has the fixed time
of their generations.
The same is true in the case of corruption. For a human being
naturally lives only for so and so long, as long as the natural heat
can be conserved in his power of radical moisture.
Aristotle, therefore, in the stated place, calls those genera-
tions natural that happen for a time determined by nature. But

-- 15 of 16 --

Suárez, De generatione et corruptione 1.1 16
those that are hastened or slowed down by some violence are
called preternatural. This is not with respect to the generated
thing but with respect to the natural order. That is, having been
made without order or with the order of nature.
Hence, when a human being dies <f. 9v> in old age, it is
called a natural death. But when killed by force, the death is
called violent. Nevertheless, if we attend to the inclination of the
one living, either corruption is violent.

-- 16 of 16 --
