Sydney Penner
Last revised: August 30, 2008
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE LEGIBUS, LIB. I, CAP. 131
WHETHER THE EFFECT INTENDED BY LAW IS TO MAKE SUBORDINATES GOOD (Utrum effectus a Lege inten-
tus sit facere subditos bonos)
1. Explicando naturam legis fere omnes eius causas 1. In explaining the nature of law we revealed almost all of
declaravimus. Primo efficientem, quia esse debet its causes. First, the efficient [cause], because it should be
ab eo, qui potestatem, et iurisdictionem habeat. from that which has power and jurisdiction. Next, the ma-
Deinde materialem quasi subiectivam, quia esse de- terial quasi-subjective [cause], because it should be in the
bet in intellectu, aut voluntate, vel in quacunque re, intellect or the will or in whatever thing that can receive in
quæ signum illius voluntatis possit in se recipere: itself the sign of that will, and the material quasi-objective
et materialem quasi obiectivam, quia esse debet [cause], because it should be about honest matter and con-
de re honesta, et circa subditos. Formalem etiam cerning subordinates. We also explained the formal cause,
causam exposuimus, declarando modum, quo lex revealing the way in which the law ought to be instituted
ferri debet, et promulgari. Denique finalem etiam and promulgated. Finally, we also arrived at the final cause,
attigimus, cum diximus, legem debere ferri pro since we said that the law ought to be instituted for the
communi bono, quia vero finis cum effectu coin- common good, but since the end coincides with the effect
cidit, non potuit sine illo plene explicari. Hic ergo it was not possible to be properly explained without that.
incipimus de effectibus tractare, et simul innotescet Therefore, we begin to discuss the effects here. At the same
amplius finis legis, qui est probitas, et honestas sub- time, the end of the law which is the probity and honesty
ditorum, et ideo ab hoc generali effectu incipimus. of the subordinates will become better-known, and there-
fore we start from this general effect.
2. Ratio ergo dubitandi esse potest, quia lex div- 2. Therefore, the reason for doubting can be that the di-
ina non habet hunc effectum, ergo multo minus vine law does not have this effect. Therefore, the others
aliæ. Antecedens patet, quia lex divina, ut lex est, even less. The antecedent is clear because the divine law
non præbet vires, nec iuvat ad operandum bonum, insofar as it is law does not present power nor aid in doing
ob quam rationem Paulus ad Roman. 3 legem vet- good. For this reason Paul calls the old law the law of death
erem vocat legem mortis: et c. 4 ait, legem iram in Rom. 3[:22]. And in 4[:15] he says that the law enacts
operari, et c. 5 lex subintravit, ut abundaret delic- wrath and in 5[:20]: ‘the law was added so that transgres-
tum. Secundo saltem lex civilis non habet facere sion might abound’. Secondly, the civil law at least does
hominem bonum, propter quod Arist. 3 Polit. c. 3 not think to make a human being good, which is why Aris-
aliam dicit esse virtutem boni viri, et aliam boni totle says in Pol. III, c. 3 that it is one thing to be a virtue of
civis: ergo et lex alia: lex ergo civilis facit bonum a good man and another [to be a virtue] of a good citizen.1
civem, sed non simpliciter bonum virum. Ratio Therefore, the law is also different. Therefore, the civil
autem est, quia finis civitatis solum est huius vitæ law makes a good citizen, but not, strictly speaking, a good
temporalis conservatio in exteriori pace, et iustitia, man. Moreover, the reason is because the end of a state is
ut sumitur ex eodem Philosopho 1 Politic. cap. 2 only the preservation of this temporal life in external peace
ad quem finem etiam ordinantur civiles leges; non and justice, as is taken from the same philosopher in Pol. I,
ergo intendunt veram probitatem morum, quæ facit c. 2.2 Civil laws are also ordered to this end. They do not
hominem bonum, sed solum exteriorem quandam intend, therefore, the true probity of morals which makes
1Latin text is from the 1679 London edition. Marginal comments omitted; ‘j’s changed to ‘i’s and most abbreviations expanded. Changed
some punctuation, e.g., removed periods after numbers.

-- 1 of 5 --

Suárez De Legibus I.13 2
observantiam, quæ facit bonum civem. Tertio ad for a good human being, but only a certain external obser-
legem implendam non est necessarius actus bonus; vation which makes for a good citizen. Thirdly, a good act
imo sæpe per peccatum impletur etiam canonica is not necessary to satisfy the law. On the contrary, even
lex: sed homo non fit bonus, nisi bonis actibus: the canon law is often satisfied by a sin. But a human being
ergo observantia legis non facit bonum: ergo multo does not become good except by good acts. Therefore, ob-
minus lex ipsa. servance of the law does not make [one] good. Therefore,
much less the law itself.
3. Nihilominus dicendum est, finem intentum a 3. Nevertheless, it should be said that end intended by law
lege esse, facere subditos bonos: atque ita hunc esse is to make subordinates good and in this way this is as it
quasi ultimum effectum legis. Ita docet D. Thom. q. were the ultimate effect of law. St. Thomas teaches this in
92, art. 1 quem omnes sequuntur. Consonat Arist. 2 [ST IaIIæ].92.1, which everyone follows. Aristotle agrees
Ethic. cap. 1 dicens, legumlatores ipsos cives as- in EN II, c. 1, saying: ‘legislators themselves make citizens
suefacientes bonos efficere. Ratio D. Thomæ est, accustomed to the good’.3 St. Thomas’s reason is that the
quia bonum subditi in hoc consistit, ut motioni goodness of a subordinate consists in being subjected to the
superioris subiiciatur, ut sentit etiam Aristot. 1 motion of his superior, as Aristotle also thinks in the last
Polit. cap. ult. movetur autem subditus a superi- chapter of Pol. I. Moreover, the subordinate is moved by
ore, mediante lege: ergo per illam efficietur bonus, the superior by means of the law. Therefore, he is made
si ei subiiciatur. Et confirmatur, quia lex, ut sit lex, good through that, if he is subject to it. And it is con-
debet esse iusta: ut autem sit iusta, oportet, ut ten- firmed, because law, insofar as it is law, ought to be just.
dat in bonum finem ad bonum commune pertinen- But in order to be just, it must tend to the good end per-
tem, et per medium honestum: ergo qui servaverit taining to the common good and through honest means.
legem, operabitur circa honestum, et propter com- Therefore, he who will keep the law, acting with honest
mune bonum, quantum est ex vi legis: ergo ex vi and for the sake of the common good, to the extent that it
illius bonus fiet. Sed hoc declarabitur melius induc- is by the strength of the law, he will therefore become good
tione facta in singulis legibus, et respondendo ad by its strength. But this will be revealed better once appli-
rationes dubitandi. cation has been made to individual laws and in responding
to the reasons for doubting.
4. Circa primum ergo argumentum manifestum est, 4. Concerning the first argument, therefore, it is manifest
divinas leges eo tendere, ut faciant homines bonos: by that that divine laws tend to make human beings good.
nam Lex quidem sancta, et mandatum sanctum, et For, as Paul says [in Rom. 7:12]: ‘Indeed, the law is holy
iustum et bonum, ut ait Paulus [ad Rom. 7:12]. and the commandment is holy, just, and good’. This is true
Quod non solum verum est de lege scripta, ut con- not only concerning written law, as we will show below
tra hæreticos infra ostendemus, sed a fortiori etiam against the heretics, but a fortiori also concerning the law
de lege gratiæ, et de lege naturali per se est evi- of grace and it is evident per se concerning the natural law.
dens: nam prohibet quidquid est malum, præcipit For it prohibits whatever is evil, but orders every virtue
autem omnem virtutem unde de illa maxime dic- whence is especially believed concerning it the saying [in
tum creditur. Quis ostendet nobis bona? signatum est Ps. 4:7]: ‘Who can show us good? The light of your face,
super nos lumen vultus tui Domine. Denique pro ra- O Lord, was stamped on us’. Finally, it suffices for this rea-
tione sufficit, Deum esse auctorem alicuius legis, ut son: God is the author of any law so that it certainly con-
certo constet ad efficiendos homines bonos datum tinues to bring about that good human beings are given.
esse. Unde ad omnem Dei legem applicari possunt Hence all praise can be applied to every law of God, which
omnes laudes, quas de lege divina prosequitur David David pursues concerning the divine law in all of Ps. 118,
toto Psal. 118, inter alia. Lucerna pedibus meis ver- among others: ‘Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light
bum tuum, et lumen semitis meis. Nam hoc modo for my path’ ([v. 105]). For the law creates good especially
præcipue lex facit bonos, scilicet, dirigendo ad id, in this way, namely, by directing to that which is good and
quod bonum est, et obligationem illud operandi im- by imposing an obligation to do that, to which Ps. 19[:7]
ponendo, cui consonat illud Psal. 18. Lex Domini agrees: ‘The law of the Lord is without blemish, convert-
immaculata, convertens animas. Et infra, Præceptum ing souls’. And in the next verse: ‘The precept of the Lord
Domini lucidum, illuminans oculos. is shining, illuminating the eyes’.

-- 2 of 5 --

Suárez De Legibus I.13 3
5. Est autem advertendum, Paulum distinguere 5. But it should be noted that Paul distinguishes law from
legem a gratia, quia lex, ut lex, licet ostendat, quid grace, because law, insofar as it is law, although it shows
operandum sit, per se non dat vires ad id exequen- what should be done, it itself does not give the strength to
dum: hoc enim ad gratiam spectat. Unde est illud follow it, for this pertains to grace. This is why Paul says
Pauli ad Rom. 7. Video aliam legem in meis repug- in Rom. 7[:23]: ‘I see another law in my members fighting
nantem legi mentis meæ, etc. Et infra, Quis me lib- against the law of my mind . . . ’ And later: ‘Who will free
erabit de corpore mortis huius? et respondet, Gra- me from the body of this death¿ ([v. 24]). And he responds:
tia Dei per Iesum Christum : lex ergo, si multa præ- ‘The grace of God through Jesus Christ’ ([v. 25]). The
cipiat, et vires operandi non præbeat, quamvis per law, therefore, if it instructs much but does not provide
se tendat ad bonum, potest esse occasio, ut homo the strength for acting, although in itself it tends to good,
propter fragilitatem suam peior fiat. Atque hic est can be the occasion for a human being to become more
sensus Pauli in prioribus locis: nam hæc erat in- wicked on account of his frailty. And this is Paul’s sense in
firmitas legis veteris, quod multa iubebat, et non the previous places. For this was the weakness of the old
iuvabat, et ideo dicitur, iram, et mortem operatam law that commanded much but did not assist. And there-
fuisse, non per se, vel ex intentione sua, sed per oc- fore it is sais that wrath and death were its work, not in
casionem ab hominibus acceptam. Unde cum dici- itself or by its intention but through an occasion accepted
tur, ut abundaret delictum, posita particula, ut, non by humans. Hence, when it is said ‘so that transgression
significat finem, sed consequutionem, quod in illa might abound’, the particle used, ‘so that’ (ut), does not
particula, ut, frequens est, et notandum in Scrip- signify the end but the consequence. That particle ‘so that’
tura.4 Ponitur autem ad denotandum, effectum il- is frequently used this way and it should be noted in the
lum prævisum esse a Deo, et ex speciali providen- Scriptures. Moreover, it is used to denote that that effect
tia permissum, ut homines suam fragilitatem, et ne- was foreseen by God and permitted by special providence,
cessitatem divinæ gratiæ, ac redemptionis Christi so that humans learn about their frailty and the necessity
cognoscerent. of divine grace and the redemption of Christ.
6. Circa secundum de lege civili aliqui Thomistæ 6. About the second [argument] concerning civil law some
existimant propterea D. Thomam addidisse, legem Thomists think that it is for this reason that St. Thomas
facere bonum, vel simpliciter, vel secundum quid: added: ‘law makes good, either strictly speaking or in a
quia lex civilis, licet non faciat bonum virum, quod qualified way’. Because civil law, although it does not make
est esse bonum simpliciter, facit bonum civem, a man good, which is being good strictly speaking, it does
quod est esse bonum secundum quid. Sed adver- make a good citizen, which is being good in a qualified way.
tendum est, illud secundum quid dupliciter accipi But it should be noted that that ‘in a qualified way’ can be
posse: uno modo, ut distinguitur bonum in aliquo taken in two ways. In one way so that good in some genus
genere, v. g. scientiæ, vel artis a bono morali, seu is distinguished, for example, of science or art from moral
honesto, quod vocamus bonum simpliciter: alio or honest good, which we call good strictly speaking. It
modo sumi potest, prout intra ipsum genus hon- can be taken in another way as within the genus itself of
esti bonum unius tantum virtutis est secundum honest [good] the good of one virtue alone is [good] in
quid, respectu collectionis omnium virtutum, quo- a qualified way, with respect to the collection of all the
modo tenperatus, si non sit bonus, vel iustus, dice- virtues, in which way temperance is called good in a qual-
tur bonus secundum quid. D. Thomas ergo sine ified way if it is not good or just. Therefore, St. Thomas
dubio loquutus est in priori sensu, adeo ut dixerit, without doubt was speaking in the former sense, precisely
leges latronum si serventur, facere bonos latrones, as he said that the laws of robbers make good robbers if
et idem est de lege militiæ et cuiuslibet artis: sed they are observed. And it is the same concerning the law
illaæ leges non sunt leges simpliciter, sed secundum of military campaigning and any other arts. But these laws
quid, ut ex principio materiæ constat. Unde leges are not laws strictly speaking, but in a qualified way as is
civiles, quæ simpliciter leges sunt, re vera non tan- clear from the beginning of the matter.
tum faciunt bonum secundum quid in illo sensu, Hence civil laws, which are laws strictly speaking, ac-
sed simpliciter, quia bonum morale et honestum in- tually do not make good only in a qualified way in that
tendant. Ita profitetur Iureconsultus in l. 1 ff. de sense but strictly speaking, because they intend moral and
iust. et iur. dicens, Iustitiam colimus, licitum ab il- honest good. The Jurist declares this in law 1 ff. in De
licito discernentes, bonos non solum metu pœnarum, Iusticia et Iure, saying: ‘We cultivate justice, distinguishing

-- 3 of 5 --

Suárez De Legibus I.13 4
sed etiam ex hortatione præmiorum efficere cupientes. the licit from the illicit, desiring to effect good not only
Idem sentit Arist. 3 Polit. c. 4 dicens finem civi- from a fear of punishments but by the encouragement of
tatis esse bene vivere, et honestatem aliquam partici- rewards’, Aristotle thinks the same in Pol. III, c. 4, saying
pare, et c. 6 ait; De virtute, et vitio publice cogitant that the end of the state is ‘to live well and to participate
quicumque curam habent bene instituendi civitatem, in some honesty’.5 In c. 6 he says: ‘Whoever has the of-
et 1 Politicor. cap. ultim. dicit omnes cives debere esse fice of establishing the state well considers public virtue
participes virtutis moralis, quantum opus est. Tamen and vice’.6 And in the last chapter of book I he says: ‘each
in Principe requirit virtutem simpliciter, utique in citizen ought to participate in moral virtue insofar as it is
secundo sensu posito, i.e. collectionem omnium vir- his task’.7 Nevertheless, of the prince he requires virtue
tutum, quia in omnibus debet præcipere. strictly speaking, at least in the second sense posited, i.e.,
a collection of all virtues, because he ought to instruct in
everything.
7. Ratio autem a priori est, quia finis humanæ 7. Moreover, the argument is a priori, because the end of a
reipublicæ est vera felicitas politica, quæ sine mori- human republic is true political felicity, which cannot exist
bus honestis esse non potest: per leges autem without honest morals. But one is directed to that felicity
civiles dirigitur in eam felicitatem, et ideo necesse through civil laws and therefore it is necessary that those
est ut illæ leges ad bonum morale per se tendant, laws tend in themselves to moral good, which, as I said, is
quod, ut dixi, est bonum simpliciter. Quando vero good strictly speaking. But when Aristotle distinguishes
Arist. bonum civem distinguit a bono viro, id facit, the good citizen from the good man, he does so because
quia plus requiritur ad virtutem boni viri, quam more is required for the virtue of a good man than for a
boni civis: quamvis enim virtus boni civis moralis good citizen. For although the virtue of a good citizen is
sit, et honesta ex se, tamen præcise sumpta est se- moral and honest according to itself, yet taken precisely it
cundum quid, secundo sensu supra declarato, et sola is [good] in a qualified way, as shown in the second sense
non sufficit ad constituendum simpliciter bonum above, and does not suffice alone for constituting a good
virum. Unde si quis sit solitarius, poterit esse vir man strictly speaking. Hence, if someone is living alone,
bonus, etiam si non sit bonus civis. Qui autem pars he will be able to be a good man even if he is not a good
est civitatis, non erit bonus simpliciter, nisi et vir citizen. But he who is a member of a state, will not be
bonus, et bonus civis sit, quia bonum ex integra good strictly speaking unless he is both a good man and a
causa: poterit autem esse bonus civis, licet non sit good citizen, because good has to be good in every respect.
bonus vir, quia esse bonum civem, est esse bonum But he will be able to be a good citizen even if he is not a
secundum quid. good man, because to be a good citizen is to be good in a
qualified way.
8. Atque hinc constat a fortiori, leges canonicas 8. And from here it is clear a fortiori that canon laws make
facere bonum simpliciter in eodem sensu: nam si good strictly speaking in the same sense. For if these are
illæ tantum serventur, non faciunt bonum omnino only observed, they do not make a wholly consummate
consummatum, id est, in omni genere boni: quod good, that is, in every genus of good. This can be said
de quacumque lege in particulari dici potest, quia of any law in particular, because it does not command all
non præcipit omne bonum, sed partem eius, præter good, but only a part of it (except the law of charity, which
legem charitatis, quæ virtute omnia complectitur. includes all virtue). And in this way any law makes good
Atque ita unaquæque lex facit bonum ex parte (ut according to a part (if I may say it that way) and in this
ita dicam) et in hoc sensu facit bonum secundum sense makes good in a qualified way. But the whole collec-
quid : tota autem collectio legum facit absolute tion of laws makes good absolutely. And actually Cajetan
bonum. Et hoc ipsum in re censuerunt Caietan. et and Soto think this very thing concerning the statement in
Soto circa dictum artic. 1 quamvis in verbis differre art. 1, although they seem to differ in words.
videantur.
9. Circa tertium occurrebat disputatio cum Adrian. 9. Concerning the third, a disputation was occurring
et aliis: an peccando mortaliter possit vere lex ali- with Adrian and others about whether some law can
qua servari. Sed de hoc videri potest D. Thomas be observed in sinning mortally. But concerning this,

-- 4 of 5 --

Suárez De Legibus I.13 5
1. 2 quæstione 100, art. 9 et 2. 2 quæstion. 44, St. Thomas can be seen in [ST ] IaIIæ.100.9 and IIaIIæ.44.4
articular. 4 et infra tractando de lege positiva dis- and it will be discussed below in treating the positive law.
putabitur, nunc admitto posse legem servari per For now I grant that a law can be observed through an
actum malum, non vero quatenus malus est, sed evil act, but not insofar as it is evil but insofar as it has
quatenus aliquid boni ex suo genere habet, ex quo something of the good in its genus. From this it only fol-
solum sequitur legem non præcipere semper omne lows that the law does not always command every good
bonum loquendo de una lege in particulari, neque when speaking of one law in particular nor does it so effi-
ita efficaciter reddere hominem bonum, ut non caciously deliver a good human being that he cannot mix
possit ipse malitiam aliquam admiscere bonitati in- in some evil with the goodness intended by the law. Hence,
tenta a lege. Unde quia bonum ex integra causa, because good happens when good in every respect, but evil
malum autem ex quocumque defectu fit, ut actus from any defect, so that an act, indeed, is strictly speaking
quidem sit simpliciter malus propter circumstan- evil on account of a circumstance attached by a human and
tiam ab homine adiunctam, et nihilominus propter nevertheless suffices for satisfying the law on account of
bonam substantiam, quam habet, sufficiat ad im- the good substance which it has. Finally, it is said that the
plendam legem. Deinde dicitur, hic maxime habere common principle ‘the end of the law does not fall under
locum vulgatum principium, Finem legis non cadere the law’ especially has its place here. For although the law
sub legem. Nam quamvis lex præcipiendo actum in commanding a good act according to its genus also in-
bonum ex genere, intendat etiam, ut bene fiat, tends that it be done well, that in this way it can make a
ut hoc modo possit hominem bonum facere, non good human being. Yet it does not always command this
tamen hoc totum præcipit semper, sed solum actus whole, but only the substance of the act and therefore it
substantiam, ideoque per illam poterit impleri. will be able to be satisfied through that.
1 1276b34–35: ‘Hence it is evident that the good citizen need not of necessity possess the excellence which makes a good man’. All
quotations of Aristotle in the notes are from the revised Oxford translation of The Complete Works of Aristotle, edited by Jonathan
Barnes (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984).
2 1252b27–1253a2: ‘When several villages are united in a single complete community, large enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing, the
state comes into existence, originating in the bare needs of life, and continuing in existence for the sake of a good life. And therefore, if
the earlier forms of society are natural, so is the state, for it is the end of them, and the nature of a thing is its end. For what each thing
is when fully developed, we call its nature, whether we are speaking of a man, a horse, or a family. Besides, the final cause and end of a
thing is the best, and to be self-sufficing is the end and the best’.
3 1103b3: ‘This is what happens in states; for legislators make the citizens good by forming habits in them, and this is the wish of every
legislator; and those who do not effect it miss their mark, and it is in this that a good constitution differs from a bad one’.
4 Cf. Pereña et al.’s edition.
5 1280a31: ‘But a state exists for the sake of a good life’. 1280b38–1281b2: ‘The end of the state is the good life, and these are the
means towards it. And the state is the union of families and villages in a perfect and self-sufficing life, by which we mean a happy and
honourable life’.
6 1280b5: ‘Whereas, those who care for good government take into consideration political excellence and defect’.
7 1260a20–24: ‘Clearly, then, excellence of character belong to all of them; but the temperance of a man and of a woman, or the courage
and justice of a man and of a woman, are not, as Socrates maintained, the same; the courage of a man is shown in commanding, of a
woman in obeying’.

-- 5 of 5 --
