Last revision: November 14, 2014
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XIII.11
© Sydney Penner 2014
<395, col. a>2
I pass over a general discussion of the material cause as ab-
stracted from the cause of substance or the cause of accident,
since the strongest ratio of this cause is discerned in prime mat-
ter. And once it has been explained in that case, it will be easy
to understand the remaining cases proportionately. Nor should
there be any fear of censure from those who think that a treatise
on prime matter in no way belongs to metaphysics but only to
physics. For it was already shown in earlier disputations, espe-
cially in the introductory one, that many aspects of this work are
relevant to metaphysics. For, although physics deals with matter
under its proper and special character, insofar as it is a principle
of natural generation and is a cause <col. b> or part of natural
being, metaphysics, nevertheless, in considering the general ratio
of material cause, which is proper to it, necessarily deals with
the first cause of that genus, which is prime matter.3 Also, when
dealing with the essence of substance, one necessarily discusses
matter, insofar as it is a part of the essence, as we will see below
when talking about material substance. Therefore, in this place
we treat matter under this consideration. And since the ratio
of causing cannot be understood without first understanding
material entity, we will first investigate whether there is matter,
then what sort of being it is and what its essence is, then what
its properties are, and then finally its causality.
SECTION I.
Whether it is evident to natural reason that there is given in beings
a material cause of substances, which we name prime matter.
1Translation is based on the 1597 edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3For the sake of readability, I have translated the Latin ‘primus’ with both
‘prime’ and ‘first’, but note that a connection that is evident in the Latin text is
lost this way. In this sentence, for example, the Latin expressions translated
as ‘first cause’ and ‘prime matter’ are ‘prima causa’ and ‘materia prima’.

-- 1 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 2
1. Because prime matter includes two aspects, it is necessary A taxonomy of the
different kinds of
matter.
before doing anything else to explain the signification of this
expression with respect to both parts. Matter, then, is usually
divided into the matter from which (ex qua), the matter in which
(in qua),4 and the matter concerning which (circa quam). This
division can be explained in different ways. In the first way it is
not a division of things or of matters but rather of the respects
or the functions of the same matter. For the same matter is
called that from which either with respect to the composite that
is constituted from it or with respect to the form that is educed
from it. Hence, in the former respect the body of a human being
is the matter from which, but not in the latter respect, since
the form of a human being is not educed from the potency of
the matter. Hence, with respect to such a form it is called the
matter in which the form is introduced in such a way that that
‘in which’ is said with respect to union rather than with respect
to eduction. That ‘in which’ can also be taken abstractly so that
it includes a disposition (habitudo) to the form as inhering in
the matter. But with respect to the agent the same matter is
called that concerning which the agent operates. According to
this interpretation of the terms, therefore, no member [of the
division] can be excluded from the present consideration. For
we are dealing with matter according to itself or as it includes
all those dispositions (habitudines) in its adequate concept. But
whether they pertain to different causalities and are distinct ex
natura rei we will see later.
In another way, matter concerning which is customarily taken
as distinguished from matter from which and in which according
to real union and inherence. In this way it properly expresses
a respect to the agent by an immanent action and it is nothing
other than the object concerning which such an agent turns. This
signification of matter is metaphorical <396> and of no relevance
at present, since that as such does not exercise material causality
or either efficient or final causality, as we mentioned above. This
discussion, therefore, is not about objective matter but about
subjective matter.
4It is sometimes suggested that ‘materia in qua’ should be translated with
‘matter of which’ rather than ‘matter in which’ (e.g., by Gyula Klima in his
translation of Thomas Aquinas’s On the Principles of Nature). The thought
is that the difference between materia ex qua and materia in qua is between
transient and enduring matter. In the case of Suárez, at least, the distinction
between transient and enduring matter is seen as one to be made within
materia ex qua. See n. 2.

-- 2 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 3
2. In turn, matter from which is customarily divided into
transient and enduring matter. Wood, for example, is in the
former way called the matter from which fire comes to be. In
that signification that expression ‘from which’ designates not only
the disposition (habitudo) of a material cause but also includes
the disposition (habitudo) of a terminus a quo. From this part
that signification in no way pertains to the present disputation.
Enduring matter, however, is a proper and internal material
cause, which endures in the composite or in the terminus of
generation, joining together in its way for the constitution of that
composite.
Finally, matter is customarily divided into metaphysical and
physical matter. Metaphysical matter is the genus in relation to
differentia. But that appellation is only through analogy and pro-
portion to physical matter, which is matter properly and strictly
speaking and which is what we are discussing here. With respect
to metaphysical matter, beyond the things which we already said
above when talking about universal unity,5 we add some things in
the last section of Disputation 15 when discussing metaphysical
form.6
3. But matter can be called prime both by negation of prior
[matter] and by relation to secondary [matter]. Since, therefore,
matter expresses the ratio of a subject, that is called prime which
presupposes no prior subject. In this way Aristotle in Physics
I.9 defined matter to be ‘the first subject from which something
comes to be’. But that is called secondary matter which presup-
poses a prior subject. And thus many call a substantial composite
secondary matter with respect to its accidents, since it is a sub-
ject of accidents in such a way that it stands on a former subject.
For a similar reason those who admit multiple substantial forms
in the same supposit, call the composite of matter and corporeal
form, for example, the secondary matter of the soul. Matter that
has been disposed or affected by accidental dispositions is often
also called secondary matter, not because the composite itself
of the matter and accidents is the subject in which the form
is received but only because the reception of such dispositions
precedes in the order of nature and establishes the matter as
proximately fit for such a form. For this reason such matter is
properly called proximate matter. But Aristotle in Metaphysics
VIII, text. 11, calls proper or proximate matter transient matter
5DM 6.
6DM 15.11.

-- 3 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 4
that is suitable for the generation of the thing, as wine is the mat-
ter of vinegar. Concerning this matter, the Commentator says in
Physics II, <col. b> comm. 31, that it is the matter of alteration,
not of composition. Thus every secondary matter presupposes
prime matter and adds some form or disposition.
The resolution of the question.
4. And from this it is clear that if we are speaking in general and, Prime matter is
inferred from the
necessity of a first
subject in any change.
as it were, formally about prime matter—that is, about the first
subject of changes or of forms—by abstracting from the question
what kind of this such a subject is or what kind of form is received
in it, then it is just as evident that there is prime matter as it is
evident that in things there are changes to different forms. For
every change presupposes some subject, as was shown above
and as is clear from experience. Therefore, either that subject
presupposes another or it does not. If it does not presuppose
another, then it is prime matter, and the intended result is had.
But if it presupposes another subject, then I will ask [the same
question] about it. But it is evident that this cannot proceed
to infinity. Therefore, one must necessarily stop in some first
subject or prime matter.
The minor proposition last assumed is demonstrated by Aris-
totle concerning all the causes in Book II, yet it is in a certain
way more evident in the case of the material cause, since it is an
intrinsic foundation of the whole composite. Nor can a composite
standing in itself be perceived by the intellect, where one part
of the composite depends on another part and another part on
another part, unless it is finally stopped in something that stands
underneath all the other parts. Since, therefore, every natural
composite is through itself in such a way that with respect to
itself the whole does not depend in the genus of material cause
on another subject that is extrinsic to it, it is necessary that it
has within itself some subject that is prime with respect to all
other entities out of which it is constituted and that are in the
subject. In this way, then, it is evident that prime matter or a
first subject is given in natural things.
5. Second, it is proven directly: for it is evident that genera- Matter is inferred from
the continuous change
of things.
ble and corruptible things are thus transformed that some are
generated from others in turn and mutually, at least mediately.
Therefore, it is necessary that they agree in some common subject
that endures in all of them, by reason of which they are suitable

-- 4 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 5
for those mutual transformations. Therefore, that subject is first
and for that reason is the prime material cause of all things of that
sort. The antecedent is evident from experience. For elements act
on each other and one is converted into another, either mediately
<397> or immediately, and mixtures are also generated from
them and consequently also resolved into them. And so it is the
case that all sublunary things, insofar as the force of their nature
and composition is concerned, are mutually transformable. I say
‘insofar as the force of their nature is concerned’ because it can
happen that some parts of the elements are never transformed
in virtue of the fact that they are in secluded and most remote
places to which the actions of contrary agents never come.
6. The first consequence is proven, first: for there can be no
natural transformation unless by a common subject enduring
under each terminus. First, because otherwise the thing that is
corrupted would entirely pass away according to itself as a whole,
and the other thing that begins to be would come to be according
to itself as a whole. And so one would pass over to nothing,
another would come to be ex nihilo, and no common thing would
endure under both. Therefore, one would be annihilated and
another created, which is naturally impossible. Also, because
otherwise the whole action of a natural agent would be either
impossible or irrelevant to the generation of things.
The consequence is shown by the fact that we can speak
either: [i] about accidental alteration, which we experience and
which obviously does not happen except in a subject and from
a common subject that remains under each terminus, since it
is clear from experience that this action does not come to be
unless a subject is presupposed. For the accident that comes
to be through it cannot naturally be except in a subject that
sustains both the action and its formal terminus. From this
subject the form or opposing privation is expelled. Therefore, a
common subject is given in an action of this kind. Or [ii] we speak
about that action or substantial transformation that comes to be
in the terminus of an alteration in which the thing that passes
away loses without qualification the being that it had before and
another thing begins without qualification, as when fire comes
to be from flax. And here, too, it is necessary for a common
subject to endure. Otherwise, the entire preceding alteration or
heating of the flax would be irrelevant to the procreation of the
fire. For the heating in no way brings anything to the procreation
of the fire, if it and its whole subject perishes entirely. At most it

-- 5 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 6
would serve to empty the place or space in which the thing to be
procreated can be introduced. But the destruction of a thing is
irrelevant for this. Local expulsion would suffice, and that can
come about through the introduction of another thing in that
space, as happens in local motion.
7. Also impossible would be such destruction of a thing
through alteration, since an accident cannot, speaking per se,
destroy its subject <col. b> since it is sustained by it and takes
up being from it. That subject, then, is either simple or composite.
If it is simple, it can in no way be destroyed through an action
or through an accident that comes to be in it, since that being
is necessary so that such an action or such an accident can
be. But if that subject is a composite of a prior subject and
another form, it will indeed be able to be destroyed by reason
of an alteration and an accident introduced into it. But not
per se but per accidens by reason of another action and form
having followed the prior alteration. But this following cannot
be understood unless the subsequent form is introduced into
the same subject in which the former form was. For otherwise
there would be no reason why the union between the former
subject and its form is dissolved. Therefore, this whole natural
transformation must necessarily be grounded in some common
subject that endures under each terminus.
8. This can also be shown by an induction made over some From some special
changes.	transformations. When an animal, for example, is nourished by
food, either something of the food remains in the end of nutrition
and is conjoined to the living substance or the food and the whole
that is in it is entirely destroyed through the action of the living
being. If nothing of the food remains, the entire action of the
living thing is superfluous and nothing can be aided by the food
so that from it something grows or becomes stronger. For nothing
becomes stronger or grows from that which perishes in the food.
But if something in the food endures, that cannot be unless it is
a common matter or subject.
The same argument can be taken from the visible and im-
proper nutrition of fire. For it does not increase except wood or
something similar is presupposed nor is it conserved except it is
nourished by oil or some similar matter. Therefore, this matter
cannot be transient according to itself as a whole; otherwise, it
would be useless and no reason could be given why it was neces-
sary for such effects. Nor could it be shown what it contributed
to those [effects]. That matter, therefore, in some way endures

-- 6 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 7
under the form of the thing that arises or is nourished. Therefore,
it endures according to some common subject.
9. It is confirmed, finally, by the fact that otherwise the trans-
formation of things would not be corruption and generation but
a kind of transubstantiation, since the whole substance of one
thing would perish and another whole substance would begin.
In fact, it would be more than transubstantiation. For not only
would there be that succession in whole substances but also in
all their accidents, since if no common subject endures much
less can the same accidents (which <398> depend on the sub-
ject for their being and their being conserved) naturally endure.
But this kind of transformation is alien to every philosophy and
every natural action. And beyond the nature of annihilation and
creation, which it includes, as I said above, no reason can be
thought of why those two things are connected in the nature of
things in such a way that the destruction of one is necessary
for the production of the other and conversely. Therefore, there
is no natural transformation through complete destruction and
inception, but only through transformation from some common
subject. And this is what Aristotle’s demonstration generally Physics I.6 and
Metaphysics VIII.1.	tends to, that this transformation is always from contrary to
contrary (opposite privations being included under contraries),
having a common subject. Therefore, it is evident that a common
subject or material cause is given.
10. The second consequence of the principal argument by Matter is discovered by
resolution to one first
subject.
which we inferred that this matter is the first cause in its order
and in that sense is most truly to be named prime matter still
needs to be proven. But this (whatever some might wish) cannot
be shown in any more evident way than the one touched on above,
namely, because one cannot proceed to infinity in proximate and
remote subjects or in subjects and subjected (if I may speak in
that way), but one must necessarily stop in some subject that is
not subjected or even composed from a part that is in a subject.
For every such composite can be resolved into simples in which
there must be something that is wholly not in a subject.
Nor does this discussion presuppose that there is not a pro-
cession to infinity of substantial forms in the same composite.
For even if this is also obvious, still, if one imagined that per
impossibile there were infinite forms in the same composite, on
the part of the potency for receiving them it would be necessary
to stop in some simple subject that is not in a subject, since the
whole collection of such forms is in some subject. Therefore, that

-- 7 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 8
[subject] is simple, as we will demonstrate at once. Therefore, we
call it prime matter.
Beyond this, moreover, that consequence can also be proven
from the community of this subject. For since all these lower
things are transformed, immediately or at least mediately, as was
said, it is necessary that what is presupposed in these transfor-
mations be first in the ratio of subject or matter. For if it were
from another prior subject or constituting matter, then either it
would also be transformable—and then <col. b> it would not be
a common subject for all transformations but that which endures
after its resolution—or it would not be transformable—and then
not every corporeal being would be transformable into any other,
but we are presupposing the opposite (but more about this in §3).
11. Therefore, from everything that has been said it is gen- Inferred from every
premise.	erally proven that in every order of transformation there must
be given some prime material cause. But it cannot be concluded
from what was said that there is given true prime matter that is
a material cause of some substance unless something is added.
Hence taken formally the arguments that have been made equally
prove that in any heavenly body there is given some first subject of
the changes that happen in them. In fact, with the same propor-
tion they also prove the same thing about any spiritual substance
you please insofar as it is capable of real change, whether local,
intellectual, or affective. For although that change is not corrup-
tive but perfective, nevertheless, it necessarily presupposes some
subject. And for that reason it is necessary that it be reduced to
some first subject in its order, which can also be named the first
material cause of that change, even though it is not called prime
matter according to the common use of this expression. For it
properly signifies the material principle of substantial change or
of constitution.
From this it also happens that even though things that in
some way are transformed have a material cause of their transfor-
mation proportionate to them, nevertheless, if the transformation
is not of one thing to another, it cannot be concluded from the
force of the transformation that there is given some first material
cause common to things of this sort. For example, although
angels have a first subject of their changes and corporeal bodies
similarly, nevertheless, since the latter cannot be transformed
into angels nor conversely, it cannot be concluded from trans-
formation that there is some first subject common to all things.
And the same argument applies in the case of celestial bodies

-- 8 of 9 --

Suárez, DM XIII.1 9
and sublunary bodies, since the latter cannot transform into the
former nor conversely. In fact, the same thing is true about the
heavens in relation to each other, since they are not mutually
transformable, but each in itself can only be changed accidentally.
This is a fortiori true in the case of created spiritual substances.
In all these cases, therefore, it can only be concluded that one
common subject of accidents is given, between which change
happens.
But in these lower substances and bodies, since they are
mutually transformable, <399> it is rightly concluded that there
is some subject both common and first. But in order to conclude
that this subject is the material cause of the substances them-
selves of such things, it is necessary to add that mutual trans-
formation of things with each other according to their substance
and not only according to accidents. For if they are transformed
only with respect to accidents, it will be enough that there be
given a first subject for such accidents, whether that substance
be simple or composite or whether it be of one nature in all things
or different.
12. Therefore, in order to conclude that prime matter of the Transformation in
things not only in an
accidental way but also
substantial.
sort that Aristotle posits is given, it remains to prove that the
transformation of these lower bodies that we experience is not
only accidental but also substantial. But beyond experience—it
seems sufficiently evident in itself not only in the case of elements
and inanimate mixtures, but much more in living things, animals,
and in us human beings since we are generated and we die—
beyond this experience, I say, it should be proven by reason
from the necessity of substantial forms distinct from accidents.
For if such forms are given, it is necessary that prime matter
be given, since it is their subject and with them composes one
integral substance, which is what it is to be the material cause
of a substance. But substantial forms are given, as remains to
be proven below in Disputation 15 and for that reason is now
presupposed. Insofar as it has been demonstrated from that
hypothesis, a true and proper prime matter is given in these
things that are generated and corrupted. The consequence is
evident and free of any difficulty. But the antecedent will be
proven in the stated place.

-- 9 of 9 --
