Last revision: March 25, 2019
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XIII.91
© Sydney Penner 2019
<428, col. a>2
SECTION IX.
What the causality of matter is.
1. There are various opinions about this matter. For some say
that the causality of matter is nothing other than the matter itself,
which presents itself to the composite and through itself sustains
the form. For its causality does not consist in the production of
some thing distinct from itself, as the causality of the efficient cause
[does], but only in the fact that it provides itself to its effect. <col.
b> But this view cannot be true. For, although it is true that matter The causality of matter
is not the entity itself of
matter.
does not cause otherwise than by sustaining or composing that
which it causes, nevertheless, the fact that it sustains or composes
something is in reality distinct from the matter itself. For the matter
can be in rerum natura and yet not cause this form or this composite.
It can also successively vary its casuality concerning different effects
while its entity remains unchanged. Therefore, the causation itself
is something else than its entity. In fact, by absolute power matter
can be conserved without any form, as we will show below, and in
that case it actually causes nothing, but would of itself only have
the potential to cause. For by this reason alone we prove that in an
agent cause action is something different from the potentiality of
the agent. But if someone perhaps says that matter causing does
not add something to the matter itself but connotes the existence
of a form in it, this will not satisfy. For, whatever the case may be
with that having been added, which we will see later, that a form
exists in matter is not for the matter to cause, formally and precisely
speaking, but rather for it to be caused or to be informed. Therefore,
something must be designated from whih that denomination of
causing is taken, and it must be shown whether that is intrinsic or
extrinsic to matter.
1Translation is based on the 1597 edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 2
2. Second, others say that actual causality adds nothing to
matter beyond the relation of cause to effect. But if the discussion
is about a proper categorial relation, this view cannot be true, since The causality of matter
cannot be a categorial
relation.
this relation follows an effect that already has been caused, with
the foundation and terminus having been posited. Therefore, it
presupposes the causality as the proximate ratio on which it follows.
Therefore, causality cannot consist in this ratio. That and what was
said above about cause in general and what was said about all the
causes is understood, lest it be necessary to repeat it more. But if
the discussion is about some transcendental relation, this opinion
coincides with the fourth one that is to be mentioned shortly.
3. The third view can be the one asserting that this causality
of matter is the very effect itself, but signified and conceived in
a different way. For this suffices to explain this causality, and
one can hardly imagine or think of anything else. But although The causality of matter
is not the same as
every effect of it.
this is perhaps true of some effect—for example, of generation and
union, as I will show shortly (for these are related just as action
to an <429> agent cause, which also can be called its effect)—
this cannot, however, be universally true, both because causality
in all causes is some medium between the cause and effect, and
also because a material form is an effect of matter and cannot
be its causality. For the soul of a horse, for example, which now
is materially caused by its matter, can be conserved in the thing
without such causality. Therefore, that causality is something other
in the thing than that soul and its entity. Just as the quantity of
the Eucharist that earlier was conserved by means of the material
causality of the substance of the bread is afterwards conserved even
though that causality has ceased. This is a sign that that causality
is something different from the reality of the quantity. But if a form
according to its absolute entity is not the causality of matter, then
neither can the whole composite be, especially since the matter
itself is included in the composite, but is not caused by itself. And
in any composite—certainly, in a human being—the form is also
included, which is not caused by the matter. How, then, could the
whole composite be the causality of matter?
4. The fourth opinion can be that the causality of matter is a The opinion of certain
people.	certain real mode of the matter that is ex natura rei distinct from
it. For if the entity of the matter is considered absolutely, only this
mode is contained in potentiality in it. For if the occasion of an agent
inducing a form is offered, the matter also actually exhibits this
mode that it receives in itself, it fosters the form, and, consequently,
composes the composite. But if such a form withdraws with another

-- 2 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 3
form a, the matter also dismisses the former mode and exhibits
another one with respect to the arriving form. The Conimbricenses-
think this in Physics II, q. 6 and 8. The foundation is taken Conimbricenses.
both from a sufficient enumeration of the parts and also because
such a mode is necessary, since it was shown that this causality is
something but it is not necessary that it be a distinct entity, since
matter is through itself immediately united to form. Therefore, it
must be some mode that in fact is really identified with matter, but
is modally and ex natura rei distinct since it is separable from it.
The resolution of the question.
5. Nevertheless, this view seems false in part and doubtful in part.
In order to show that and to make my view clear, I distinguish four
things that I said above are caused by matter: generation, the union
<col. b> of the form, the entity of the form, and the composite itself.
With respect to generation, then, I think that it is directly caused
by matter without any other thing or mode added to the matter
beyond the generation itself that inheres in it. And for this reason
the causality of the generation itself from the matter is nothing
other than the generation itself as it is an eduction from the matter.
Just as action comes from an agent not through another action
but through itself and has the ratio of an action insofar as it as an
emanation from the agent cause and as such is the very causality
of the agent, as I will say below, so likewise eduction or passive
generation insofar as it essentially depends on the subject and
through itself is necessarily conjoined to it is materially caused by it
not through another causality but through itself. This is especially The causality of matter
with respect to
generation is the
generation itself.
shown by the explanation itself of the subject. For the causality of
matter with respect to generation is very well understood in this
way, and nothing else is necessary. Therefore, imaging something
else is superfluous.
It is shown, second, from accidental changes and unions. For
when wood heats, the heating is in such a subject and from the
subject. There are not, however, two changes in that subject, one of
which is the passive heating itself and the other of which is some
mode by which such a subject materially causes heating or is united
to it. For multiplying these changes is superfluous. The very fact
that there is such a heating as intrinsical implies a disposition
(habitudo) of actual union and dependence on such a subject in
the genus of material cause. It itself is caused by the subject, the
subject causes it, it is united to the subject, and the subject remains

-- 3 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 4
united to it. It is superfluous, then, to add another change in the
subject. The same, therefore, is the case in the material causality of
substantial generation.
Hence, it is confirmed, third: for the cause causes through
the same thing or through the same mode by which the effect is
caused, since causation itself as such essentially includes this two-
fold disposition: to the cause as to a principle and to the effect
as to a terminus. For this reason it denominates both, the one
as causing and the other as caused. But by the very fact that
generation depends intrinsically and essentially on matter, it is
directly caused by it. Therefore, for the same reason, matter is
denominated as causing something insofar as that thing is from
matter. Therefore, no other thing or mode is necessary in order for
matter to be denominated as actually causing generation. In fact, it
is also unintelligible how matter would cause generation through
another mode.
Which is explained, fourth: for matter causing generation is
nothing other <430> than to sustain it as a subject. But it sustains
it immediately in entity and through its entity by the fact that gen-
eration comes to be in it. Therefore, every other mode is irrelevant
for this causality, nor can it confer anything to this sustaining.
6. I argue, last, that if the causality of matter were some distinct
real mode beyond generation itself, it would have to be made by
some agent. For every new real mode must be made by a new cause.
But there is no agent by which such a mode is made. Therefore.
The minor is proven: for just as an agent only acts through its
substantial or accidental form, so in that way it also does not
concur effectively except for the eduction of a form—which is, for
example, heating—or for generation. Therefore, it does not make
some mode beyond that. You will say: although it does not directly A response to an
objection.	make another mode, one results, nevertheless, since by the very fact
that this thing is united to that, a union of this to that results. But
to the contrary, first, because it was shown that there is no necessity
for such a resultancy for causality, nor does it seem necessary for
the union. For another thing can be denominated united through a
union of another thing to itself, without a new mode of union in it,
as theologians say of the mystery ofthe Incarnation. And in natural
cases when, for example, a human being sits, the sitting is united
to the human being and the human being to the sitting. Would
someone imagine that the human being is denominated united to
the sitting through a new mode distinct from the sitting rather
than through the sitting itself that is directly united to the subject?

-- 4 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 5
Otherwise, there would be an infinite regress. Likewise, then, matter
is denominated united to generation because the generation comes
to be in it. Nor any other mode that results in the matter necessary.
Hence, I will inquire what kind of thing that resultancy is and from
where it is. For it can be understood in two ways. The first [way
is] that that mode results from the matter once the action of the
agent educing form is posited in the matter. But in this way matter
effectively makes its material causality, which cannot be said even
if that efficiency is said to be through a natural resultancy. Second,
it can be thought a resultancy that is made by an extrinsic agent
by means of a form that it induces in the matter. In this way the
induced form effects the material causality through which it itself is
caused and it would be prior in nature in the matter to the mode
that results. From this it is easy to be convinced that such a mode
is irrelevant to the causality of matter.
7. <col. b> From these things, therefore, as I think, it is clear
enough that in the case of the material causality of generation the
causality of this kind is not distinguished from the generation itself
as it is in the matter and by which the matter is denominated as
actually causing insofar as it is from that, just as from the same
thing the generating thing is denominated actually acting insofar
as it is from that. Hence, just as the denomination of agent is not
from some mode that is in the agent itself but is extrinsic to the
action, so also the denomination of actually causing in the matter
itself is not from some mode that is intrinsic to it in such a way that
is identical to it in reality but from the generation itself insofar as
it is from that. For this reason such a denomination can be called
extrinsic, even though, since the generation is in the matter itself,
it can for that reason be called intrinsic. In that it differs from the
denomination of agent.
You will say: it is possible for God to conserve numerically the
same generation separately from the matter, but in that case it
would not be caused by the matter. Consequently, it would not
denominate that as actually causing. Therefore, it is not denom-
inated as actually causing precisely from the generation as such.
Therefore, some other mode must be added. It is responded that, Generation cannot be
conserved outside a
subject even
supernaturally.
in the first place, the assumption is false, since it implies that an
action of generation is or is conserved outside a subject and apart
from the causality of matter. This is both because generation es-
sentially is change and change cannot3 be understood without a
subject, and also because generation in all cases other than human
3I am omitting a duplicated ‘potest’ in the 1597 edition.

-- 5 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 6
beings essentially is an eduction of a potentiality in matter. But
in the human case it is a uniting of the form with the matter. In
either way it is repugnant to understand it without the concurrence
of matter. Finally, also because an action without the concurrence
of a subject is a creation, whether productive (if it is new) or con-
servative (if it concerns a pre-existing thing). Therefore, the action
is necessarily changed by the very fact that the form that was in
the subject and was depending on the subject is conserved outside
the subject. Hence, it is concluded that the change that is genera-
tion essentially includes a union to matter and the causality of the
matter. For this reason matter is denominated as causing from that
[generation] precisely taken. Furthermore, even if we gratuitously
granted what is assumed, one could not thereby infer that a special
mode is necessary in the matter for that denomination, but that
in the generation is distinguished the entity and the formality of
generation from its union with the matter, just as we will say below
about the form itself. But since that is not true in the change that
is generation, we will not linger on this point here. <431>
8. From these things it is further concluded that the causality Matter influences the
form and the composite
by generation as by
causality.
of matter insofar as it is a cause in becoming, whether of the form
or of the composite, is nothing other than the generation itself as
essentially depending on the matter. For by its mediation matter
concurs in the eduction of the form or in the composition of the
composite. But the causality of a cause is nothing other than its
concurrence. Furthermore, since to cause some thing in becoming
is nothing other than that the coming to be of such a thing is from
such a cause, therefore, a thing in becoming is caused through the
same causality as that through which the coming to be of the thing
is caused. This is clear by similarity with the agent cause. For the
very same action that is directly from the agent is its active causality
with respect to the terminus or to the thing in becoming. Therefore,
the same relationship should be preserved in the case of material
causality.
Finally, many of the arguments already made can be applied
here, especially the one about this ratio of causing being sufficient
for that denomination by which matter is said to cause the thing that
is generated, and that once that ratio of causing is posited—and with
any other mode set aside through the intellect—that denomination
necessarily follows. Therefore, anything else that someone comes
up with is superfluous and without foundation.
One should only note the differences in this causality with
respect to the form and with respect to the composite. With respect

-- 6 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 7
to the form matter remains extrinsic in a certain way, insofar as
it sustains the form in itself as informing, but not intrinsically
composing it. For this reason, it seems most obvious that the
causality of matter with respect to a form in becoming is nothing
other than its eduction or uniting insofar as it is from matter, which
we show is nothing other in reality than the generation itself. But
with respect to the composite, matter is related more intrinsically,
since it through itself composes that. For this reason, with respect to
the composite it seems necessary that the matter itself be included
intrinsically. But this is indeed true with respect to inclusion in the
caused effect, but not, however, with respect to the path or with
respect to the coming to be by which it tends to such an effect in
this genus of material cause. For matter is not a cause in becoming
of the produced thing in such a way that it itself also comes to
be. For it was always presupposed to have been made. It only
communicates to the composite what is generated in its genus of
cause. And, insofar as this communication is in becoming and
matter is its cause, it is said to be the cause of the produced thing
in becoming. But this communication is not in becoming except by
means of eduction or generation. And for this reason, this whole
causality, insofar as it is understood to be <col. b> a medium
between matter and the effect or composite, in reality is nothing
other than the generation itself insofar as it is from matter.
The causality of matter persevering after motion.
9. It remains to speak about the causality of matter in the case
of being already having been made. In order to explain that, one
should begin with the causality of the union of form with matter.
For we say that this [union] is also caused by matter, but we add
now that it is not caused through some causality distinct from such
a union but through itself. This can be demonstrated easily from The union of form to
matter is caused
through itself by matter
and depends on matter.
what was said about generation, since the reasoning is proportional.
We show it in this way: for this union of form with matter is also
conjoined to matter in the way in which it can be. Therefore, it
through itself depends on matter in the way in which it can depend.
Therefore, it is caused through itself. For it is caused to the extent
that it depends. Therefore, conversely, matter causes that union
through itself. For, as I said, it is the same causality by which the
effect is denominated as being caused and the cause as causing. All
of the proven consequences are above, but the antecedent is clear,
first, a posteriori. For it is impossible for that union to be conserved

-- 7 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 8
without the concurrence of matter or rather it being in matter in
the way that it can. This, therefore, is a sign that it through itself
immediately and essentially depends on matter. For if it were to
depend by the mediation of some mode distinct ex natura rei, God
could conserve that union without the matter by removing that
mode. This is the reason he can conserve the form, as I will say
below. The antecedent is clear, because union cannot remain unless
it actually unites, but it cannot actually unite unless the extremes
are conjoined and it reaches each in the way that it can and must.
And this it the reason a priori on account of which that union in itself
depends essentially both on the form and on the matter, on each
in its genus, since it is as their actual bond and does not require
any other intervening bond or mode by which it reaches them or
is conjoined to them, lest there be an infinite regress. Finally, this
is confirmed by the reasoning given above, since this is sufficient
for this causality and cannot be posited without it. But once it has
been posited and with every other mode set aside, such causality
of matter is sufficiently understood. Therefore, everything else is
fictitious and without foundation. Nor is there any difficulty with
this beyond what should be touched on at once. <432>
10. From here I add further that the causality of matter in the The enduring causality
of matter in the case of
a material form is
union.
form itself (when the form is such that it is caused by the matter
and depends on it) is nothing other than the proper union of such a
form with the matter, insofar as the union itself materially depends
on the matter and by means of that form itself also depends on the
matter. I said ‘is nothing other than the proper union of such a
form’ because not just any union suffices for this causality. For
a rational soul has a proper union with matter, where the union
is also materially caused by the matter and yet the soul itself is
not caused [by it]. Therefore, not just any union is the causality of
the form itself, but those that are through the eduction of the form.
From which, incidentally, we understand the union of the rational What the nexus of a
rational soul with
matter is.
soul with matter to be singular and of a different essential ratio
from every union of a material form, which we can call substantial
inhesion. And this we say is the causality through which matter
causes such a form.
11. You will say: why can we not distinguish two modes in the An objection is
resisted.	material form, one of which is the mere union of form and matter
(of which kind is the one in the rational soul, and that form does
not through it depend on the matter but is only united to it for
composing the composite), while the other mode is the dependence
of such a form on matter? I respond: because to distinguish and

-- 8 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 9
multiply such modes is either plainly impossible or entirely super-
fluous. First, because we do not distinguish two modes in the case
of an accident, one of which is union and the other is inherence or
the dependence of the accident on the subject. Rather, by the same
inherence it is united and depends, and so on. Second, because
proper dependence on a material cause intrinsically and essentially
includes union such that it can neither come to be nor be under-
stood except it intimately includes that. Therefore, inhesion, which
is the same as that material dependence, is not a mode that is ex
natura rei distinct from the union of the inhering form but is like a
species of union in general . For one is inhesive, but the other is
not. Therefore, just as genus and species are not modes that are
distinct ex natura rei in the same individual, so union and inhesion
or material dependence are not distinct modes in the same form.
From these easily proven things, then, the posited assertion is left.
For this form depends on matter through its union. Therefore, by
the mediation of that it is caused by matter in its genus. Therefore,
matter also <col. b> causes the form by the mediation of that, ac-
cording to the principle posited above that to be caused and to cause
express the same causation under different respects. Therefore, this
very union is the causality of matter with respect to such a form.
Second, because the causality of a cause mediates in a certain way
between it and the effect. But nothing mediates between matter and
form except this union and, as it were, inhesion. Therefore, that is
the causality of matter in the form. Third, because this suffices for
this genus of causality, even with everything else whatever having
been set aside through the intellect.
12. You will say: this also does not seem necessary, since
form and matter are immediately united, as was said above. It is
responded: an immediate union does not exclude a mode of union
really or ex natura rei distinct from the extremes, but excludes an
intermediate form that stands in between as a common terminus in
which the extremes are conjoined. But a mode of union cannot be
excluded when the extremes are such that they can be separated.
For, unless one or the other of them holds itself differently than
when they are divided, they could not be really united. For this
reason theologians posit a mode of union on the part of humanity
even in the mystery of the Incarnation.
How many unions in a material composite.
13. But from here another difficulty arises, which seems to be

-- 9 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 10
of some import only in this view, which is why we said that the
fourth opinion is doubtful in part: namely, because if the form is
united to the matter through a proper mode of union, then the
matter is also united through a proper mode of union. Therefore,
matter causes not only through the union or inhesion of the form,
but much more through its proper union by which it is conjoined
to the form. And thus the causality of matter will be the proper
mode of the matter itself rather than [the proper mode] of the form.
In response to this difficulty, I confess that it is a doubtful issue
whether matter has a proper mode of union distinct from the union
of form in a composition of matter and form. Nevertheless, I say
two things. One is that the denying side is very probable, since one
simple mode of union is sufficient for the union of two extremes
that are immediately united to each other, and a special reason can
be assigned for why such a mode pertains more to the form and is
really identical to it rather than to the matter. Therefore, it is not
necessary to multiply multiple modes of this sort.
The major is proven: for every mode of union <433> is a bond
between two extremes. Hence, it expresses a disposition to each
one, without which it could not be. Therefore, any mode of union
whatever unites two extremes, of which it is the union. Therefore,
one is sufficient for conjoining extremes of this kind. And for this
reason we said above that the union of form to matter cannot be
or be understood in the nature of things without conjunction or
dependence not only on form but also on matter. And therefore, if
through the intellect we prescind from every other mode identified
with matter, we will understand matter and form to be perfectly
united to each other through the union of form to matter alone, and
we will understand matter to exercise the whole causality it has in
the form. Therefore, two modes of union are not necessary; one is
sufficient.
But the minor—namely, that this mode pertains to the form
rather than to the matter—is proven: for the entire efficiency of a
natural agent formally and proximately has its terminus in a form,
in educing it or in uniting it to matter. Therefore, whatever new
is made is in the form as in the formal terminus of action, but in
matter only as in a subject. For this reason, it does not unite matter
to form by directly effecting a special mode in the matter, but only
by uniting the form to the matter and by effecting informing and
union or inherence in it. And this is fitting for the way that matter
and form relate and concur. For matter stands under the action
of an agent and under the advening and recess of forms. Hence, it

-- 10 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 11
remains unvaried with respect to its own entity and with respect
to all of its intrinsic modes. It is only varied or changed by reason
of privation, either of a form receding or advening again. John
of Damascus seems to say this by these words in his Physics, ch. John of Damascus.
3, where he says of matter: ‘in order for it to possess the ratio of
subject and insofar as it attains to the fact that it is potentiality, it
is furnished with substance and exists with privation; and with a
form actually present, it remains and conserves the former [that
it, potentiality] free from every change, and from this it happens
that it does not migrate from its being a potentiality to actuality,
but remaining true in its state, it receives the form, and, if the form
recedes, it again retains its former state’. But form is what advenes
to matter and recedes from it. For this reason, every change that
comes to be in matter is by reason of a form, and, likewise, every
union is through the conjunction of the form with it. This is further
explained through a material example: for the base that supports a
column is not in itself changed and it does not change location or
any <col. b> other mode from the fact that a column is placed on
it, removed from it, or changed. Rather, the whole change is in the
column that is placed above, from which arises every denomination
in the base that is said to support the column. And likewise in the
case of accidental changes. For example, in the case of wood that
heats, there are not two changes in the wood, one in the adhesion
of heat and the other in the union of the wood to the heat. Rather,
there is only one, which consists in the introduction of heat.
14. I add, second, that, even if we were to admit gratuitously
that there is a proper mode of union in matter that is distinct from
the union of the form, nevertheless, one could not attribute to it
that it is the causality through which matter causes the form. For
the matter does not sustain the form through such a mode nor
does the form depend on matter through such a mode. The former
part is clear, since matter does not sustain form through a mode
but through its entity. The latter part is proven: for form depends
through its inhesion on matter. Hence, if there is such a mode of
union in matter, it would instead be as an effect following on the
informing, and, insofar as it itself is concerned, it will be of the
same ratio whether the form depends on matter or not. Another
discussion about the union of matter will come up when treating
the formal cause.4
15. From these things is further concluded that the causality of By what causality the
matter constitutes the
composite.
matter with respect to the composite adds absolutely nothing to the
4See especially DM 15.6.

-- 11 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 12
matter itself beyond the union of the form, and thus the causality
of the composite is nothing other than the causality of the form or
of the union. It only adds with respect to the composite that the
matter by means of the union offers itself for intrinsically composing
the composite. Hence, if the very entity of matter more intimately
enters into the causality of the composite than of the form or of the
union, in reality, nevertheless, nothing else comes up other than
the entity of the matter and the union or causality of the form.
16. Lastly, it is understood from what has been said what was Matter contributes two
distinct causalities.	suggested above: that there are only two causalities of matter that
are ex natura rei distinct, although more can be distinguished by
reason. For material causality with respect to a thing in becoming or
in having been made are ex natura rei distinct, just as generation is
ex natura rei distinct from the form or from the produced thing, and
uniting in becoming from union as having been made. But we show
that the causality of a thing in becoming is not distinct in reality
from generation itsel of from the uniting. But the causality of a thing
having been made <434> likewise is not distinguished from a union
as having been made and formally serving as the terminus of the
uniting. Therefore, it is necessary that the causalities of this sort
be ex natura rei distinct from each other. You will say: these two An objection is
addressed.	causalities can be reduced to one, since a thing in having been made
is not caused except by the mediation of action. Therefore, its whole
causality consists in the action and in the generation itself as it is in
matter. For all that is left is what is caused rather than causalities,
just the whole causality with respect to an agent consists in the
action or the uniting, and a union in having been made is not the
causality of the agent but what is caused. It is responded: these are
not equivalent, since a material cause is through itself the cause of
the thing in having been made, even if every action ceases, such that
if per impossibile a material composite does not depend on some
agent in becoming or in being conserved, matter would, nevertheless,
have its causality with respect to such a composite or with respect
to its form. There is, therefore, in matter a certain proper causality
which is not directed at action or at change and does not come about
through that, but is immediately directed at the being of the whole
composite, insofar as it includes the union of matter with form. And
from the following section it will be clear that sometimes matter is
the cause of a thing and not of the production of the thing. Therefore,
these causalities are ex natura rei distinct. But each of them can
be compared and precisely conceived in relation to different things
and can be explained according to different dispositions in relation

-- 12 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.9 13
to the form or the composite. Nevertheless, that whole distinction
is inadequate through reason or through our concepts, as is clear
from the above.

-- 13 of 13 --
