Last revision: August 28, 2025
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XIII.31
© Sydney Penner 2014
<402, col. a>2
SECTION III.
Whether the single first material cause of generable substances is
some simple body or a whole ( integra) substance.
1. As Aristotle and the other authors cited in the preceding section
report, the ancient philosophers who posited only one material
principle of all natural things almost all thought that it is some
whole substance or simple body (of the sort that Averroes thinks
celestial body to be). But there were many opinions among them
about that body or material cause.
The opinions of the philosophers about the one material principle.
2. First, it was asserted that this principle is water. The author of
this view was Thales of Miletus. But others, such as Plutarch, think
the origin is more ancient and drawn from Orpheus.3 The second
opinion attributes this function to air. Anaximenes [of Miletus] and Anaximenes.
Diogenes.
Aristotle.
Simplicius.
Hippasus.
Heraclitus.
Diogenes of Apollonia taught this, as Aristotle reports in Physics I.3
and as Simplicius shows in the same place. The third opinion was
that fire is a cause of this sort. Hippasus and Heraclitus taught
this and the Stoics followed the same opinion, as it in Cicero, De
natura deorum 3.4 <col. b> The fourth view can elect earth to
this office from the fact that it stands under all things and is, as
it were, the common mother of all things. Nevertheless, Aristotle
says in Metaphysics I.7 that this was the vulgar opinion but that
none of the philosophers are inclined towards it by the fact that
1Translation is based on the 1597 edition. Paragraph numbering, however, in
which the 1597 and Vivés editions do not agree in this case, follows the Vivés
edition, since it is the most widely used edition (The 1597 paragraph numbers
are included in square brackets). Numbers in angle brackets also indicate page
numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3De Isis et Osiris 34?
4Vivés edition cites book 2 instead.

-- 1 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 2
earth on account of its excessive density and dryness seems to
be unsuitable for receiving the forms or figures of other things.
Nevertheless, Hesiod in his Theogony unreservedly calls earth the Hesiod.
Pherecydes.	material principle of all things and Theodoretus in De materia et
mundo reports that Pherecydes [of Syros] thinks the same thing. The
fifth opinion attributes this function to none of these four elements
but to a certain insensible body in the middle of or between water
and air, as Aristotle reports in Metaphysics I.7, or between air and
fire, as Anaximander reports, who adds that this intermediate body
is infinite lest generation cease at some point. From this it seems
to be gathered that this philosopher did not consider this body
incorruptible. Otherwise, there would be no reason to fear that
it could be consumed through a succession of generations if it
were finite, although one can hardly understand how he made it
corruptible if he considered it to be simple and the common subjects
of generation.
3. It would be long-winded and superfluous to report the proper A judgement is brought
regarding the
aforementioned views.
motive of all these philosophers, as a result both of being uncertain
and of not wearing any probability or verisimilitude on their sleeves,
so that it will become clear from what will be said along the way. But
what seems to have been common to all is that they thought that
nothing new could come to be strictly speaking. For from nothing
nothing can come to be. For this reason they seem to recognize
neither substantial forms nor substantial generation or corruption.
In fact, many of them proclaimed that there are no accidental forms
that are true beings, since they did not understand that some new
true thing can come to be. They thought that every change that we
experience consists in various ways (in variis modis) of holding itself
of that thing which they thought was common matter.
From this some progressed further than that so that they did
not say that the material cause of all beings is one but that all beings
are one, not in number but in substance and essence. Although
what they said is false and improbable, nevertheless they spoke
logically (consequenter) if they were dealing only with generable
bodies. For if these are not transformed substantially and do not
differ through substantial forms but only through accidental forms
or through <403> holding themselves in different ways, no material
cause of substance is really given, but only a simple substance that
is not essentially one and another, but is one holding itself in one
way and another way under different accidents.
4. And this was the opinion of Xenophanes, Parmenides, and Xenophanes.
Parmenides.
Melissus.
Melissus, who in this sense said that everything is one being and

-- 2 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 3
whatever is beyond that is not being. For they do not count accidents
or the modes of those beings as beings. Consequently, they get rid
of every generation or change strictly speaking by the fact that they
make that being ungenerable and incorruptible and by the fact that
they do not think that accidental changes merit the absolute title of
change since they do not give being strictly speaking.
But some of these philosophers are interpreted in other ways,
namely, that through one being they understood one universe that
contains all things, as Aristotle hints at in De generatione I.8 and
Simplicius in Physics I.2. Or through one being they understand
God, who alone truly is. For Aristotle in Metaphysics I.5 and Cicero
in Academica 2 report that Xenophanes named that one being God.
And thus many, weighty authors deem these philosophers to have
spoken through enigmas and to have hidden the truth through
figurative expressions. But Aristotle attacked their views insofar
as they seem to be advanced through the surface appearance of
those words. Concerning this matter, one can read St. Thomas in St. Thomas.
Philoponus.
Simplicius.
Steuco.
Mirandola.
Bessarion.
Metaphysics III, text. 15; Philoponus and Simplicius in Physics I.2;
Agostino Steuco, De perenni philosophia III.5; Giovanni Francesco
Pico della Mirandola5 Examen vanitatis doctrinae gentium VI.1, and
Basilios Bessarion, Contra calumniatorum Platonis. What these
philosophers think or what mystery they hide with their words is of
little importance for us. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that if they
disregard substantial forms as they seem to have disregarded them,
given that they make no mention of them, they could consequently
easily and sufficiently have fallen into that view as described by us.
Hence, this a proof and confirmation of substantial forms will refute
this view just as well as others.
5 [4]. But one can refer in this place to another view, which The opinion asserting
that the form of
corporeity is coeval
with matter.
many of the modern philosophers follow and which places in prime
matter a form of corporeity that is coeval with it and inseparable
from it. For although with respect to such a form its material cause
is simple—that is, apart from essential and physical composition—
nevertheless, the common subject that <col. b> remains through
every transformation and that is the universal material cause of
every generation and of every substantial form that comes to be
through eduction and of every composit that is generated, that sub-
ject, I say, is not simple according to the just-mentioned opinion.
Rather, it is essentially composite and is some body that is not
mixed, nor something from the elements, nor something intermedi-
5An Italian philosopher and nephew of the better-known Giovanni Pico della
Mirandola.

-- 3 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 4
ate between them through a participation in them, but is absolutely
a body through the cutting away of all lower forms. Avicenna holds Avicenna.
Scotus.
Henry.
this opinion in The Book of Healing I.2. Its foundation is that the
subject of generation must be corporeal and extended and conse-
quently a quantity, but it cannot be something of this sort unless it
has some substantial form.
Scotus and Henry of Ghent follow this view in part. For the
former thinks in IV, dist. 11, q. 3, art. 2, that this kind of form
of corporeity or of mixture (as he puts it) is necessary in all and
only living things. But the latter in Quodlibet 2, qq. 2 and 3, and
Quodlibet 3, qq. 13 and 14, thinks that it should only be admitted
in the case of human beings on account of the divisibility of the
rational soul. Hence, these two authors do not posit this form
as inseparable from matter nor as per se necessary for the first
material causality of the subject of generation, but on account of
other special reasons. For this reason their opinion does not pertain
to the present topic.
Resolution of the question.
6 [5]. It should be said first, then, that the material cause that is The first conclusion.
universal and first in its order is not something from the sensible
bodies or elements that are affected by contrary qualities. This
assertion is contrary to the first four opinions and it is evident from
what was said in the preceding section. If these elements and all
sensible bodies are substantially transformed into each other, none
of them can be the first subject of transformation. For the first
subject, which is the first material cause which we are seeking, is
not transformed and neither does it withdraw from its substance.
Otherwise, it would resolve into some prior subject and thus would
not be the first subject.
Furthermore, since generation takes place between contraries,
it is necessary that the common subject of generation not have
any of the contraries naturally innate in itself. Otherwise, it will
either never be capable of the other contrary or it will be destroyed
through the casting down of what is connatural to it, just as an
element is destroyed when a quality <404> that is necessary to it
is removed. Since, therefore, the individual elements are affected by
proper qualitied having contraries, none of them can be a suitable
subject of generation. Therefore, neither can any of them be the
first material cause of natural beings.
7 [6]. From here a third argument arises, since there is no

-- 4 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 5
reason why this causality is attributed to one element rather than
to another, nor why it is more repugnant to all of them at once
than to some one of them. But it was shown that it cannot agree
with all of them. Therefore, it is not truly attributed to any of them.
The former part of the major proposition is shown by the fact that
the individual elements are simple bodies. And each of them is
designed for and suitable for the generation of mixtures, and none
of them can in any way be constituted from the others. For each has
proper qualities repugnant to the others. Therefore, in all of them
there is an equal ratio or repugnance, so that they cannot be the
common matter of all generable things. For that in certain things
there are certain conditions accommodated to the office of common
matter—as is, for example, subtlety in fire, by reason of which it can
easily penetrate all things, and in air, which almost is the common
place of all things and easily receives external impressions, and
humidity in water since it is conjoined to density, which seems to
be proportionate for constituting nourishment for all things—these
conditions, I say, are of no relevance. First, because they are of
more help for the ratio of effecting or for the ratio of transient matter
than for the proper and intrinsic ratio of a material cause. Second,
because these conditions also are just as accommodated to certain
things as they are repugnant to others. For the subtlety of fire has
proportion with the matter of subtle things but not with the matter
of dense things. Likewise for the others. But the first material cause,
since it is common to all things, must of itself be indifferent to all
things.
8 [7]. The other part of the major proposition is proven by the
fact that all elements at once cannot be the common matter, since
they are substantially transformed into each other. But this argu-
ment works equally well for each element taken in itself. Therefore.
Hence, finally, it is confirmed: for no element can be the matter of
other elements, as seems to be known per se, since they are repug-
nant to it. Nor can it be the matter of some mixture while remaining
in its own nature, since the form of the mixture is also repugnant to
the form of the element. Therefore, no element <col. b> can be the
common matter of all natural things. And these reasons a fortiori
establish [the case] concerning all mixtures, especially since these
are constituted from the elements. For this reason no one has so
far attributed this causality to any mixture.
9 [8]. I say, second: prime matter is not some body or some The second conclusion.
complete substance, both whole in essence and in a species of sub-
stance. That matter is a substance of this sort can be understood in

-- 5 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 6
two ways. First, such that it alone is the substance of all generable
things and is formed through its distinct accidents. This is the sense
in which the assertion was proved from the fact that natural things
differ not only in accidents but also in substance and essence, as
we argued in a previous section against Epicurus and others.6 It
should also be rejected (and this comes to almost the same thing)
from the truth of substantial forms, which we will demonstrate in
the 15th Disputation. For when that truth is supposed, it obviously
follows that matter is not the whole substance of material things.
And these things differ not only in accidents but also in essence
and substance. They are transformed not according to accidents
only but according to substance. This is also sufficiently evident
from experience itself. For when a thing is changed with respect to
accidents only, some trace of its properties and operations remains
in it, or at least it returns to its state and nature when the contrary
agents are removed.7 But we see that some things are changed and
destroyed in such a way that the former properties and operations
are completely lost, even if every contrary action ceases. Conversely,
other things are produced and generated in such a way that they
constantly remain in that being that they acquire as if it were proper
and connatural, and they have their proper and connatural opera-
tions and dispositions in accordance with it, which they preserve
as long as they can. If sometimes they are made to waver or to be
diminished by some contrary, they return to them from their proper
and intrinsic nature as soon as the contrary action ceases. This
is a sign, then, that things are corrupted and generated not only
with respect to sensible accidents but also with respect to proper
substance. In these ways the five opinions listed above are attacked
as much as the opinion that asserts that all things are one in the
explained sense.
10 [9]. In another way, then, someone could imagine matter
to be a whole complete substance in some species of substance
and yet <405> being apt for receiving further substantial forms
and with them composing the different substances and essences of
material things. This sense, too, is improbable. For matter would
be a complete substance that is either entirely simple or that is a
composite of some potentia and substantial actus.8
6DM 13.2.
7Cf. DM 15.1.8 and 12.
8Because they are the key technical terms and because it is unclear how best
to translate them, I will leave ‘actus’ and ‘potentia’ untranslated in this section.
Generally, ‘actus’ could have been translated either with ‘act’ or with ‘actuality’,

-- 6 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 7
But the latter cannot be said, first, because in that case it would
not be the whole composite that is the first material cause but rather
the potentia from which it is composed. Perhaps it will be said that
this is true with respect to the composite that is being imagined
as ungenerable and incorruptible, but, nevertheless, with respect
to every generable being or generation the first material cause is
the whole composite. But against this is objected, second, that
such a composite is imagined without any foundation. For there
is no indication or sensible sign of that form placed between pure
matter and the other forms that are introduced through generation.
For that form has no sensible property by which it is discerned
(dignoscatur). For the primary qualities follow per se on the forms
of the elements and the temperament composed from those qualities
on the forms of the mixtures. But all the remaining qualities or
properties that we experience presuppose the prior qualities at least
in the genus of material and dispositive. There is, then, no sensible
or material indication of such a form. Hence, there is a third
[objection] as it is wholly superfluous, since there is no physical
effect for the sake of which it is necessary. For it is not for the sake
of effecting, since it has no quality through which to effect, and from
elsewhere the proper form that is connatural to a quality suffices for
that quality. Nor is it for the sake of receiving, for that potentia that
is said to stand under such a form is sufficient for this. For why
would that not also immediately be made the subject of the form
that is introduced through generation? For the same reason such a
form is also not necessary for conserving the potentia whose actus it
is said to be. For the form that is introduced through generation is
sufficient for this. Therefore, such a form is imagined superfluously
and without foundation.
11 [10]. Fourth, there is added the impossibility of conjoining
those two forms to the same potentia or matter. For, although it
is in question whether a generic, as it were, and a specific form
can actualize matter simultaneously (something we will touch on
a little farther down), it is, nevertheless, plainly impossible for
two specific forms to be conjoined simultaneously for actualizing
the same substantial potentia. Almost all the authors <col. b>
agree about this. Either those two forms immediately actualize the
matter or one would be the actus of the other or the actus of the
while ‘potentia’ could have been translated either with ‘potency’ or ‘potentiality’.
In other contexts, ‘potentia’ can also mean ‘power’ but that is probably not the
right translation in this context. Suárez also uses ‘actualitas’, ‘potentialitas’, and
cognates; these I will render into their closest English cognates.

-- 7 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 8
matter as informed through the other. The first cannot be said,
especially according to that view, since otherwise the prior form
would not necessarily be presupposed for the latter form. Nor can
the composite of matter and such a form be the proximate potentia
and material cause of the subsequent form. The second also cannot
be said, since a substantial form constituting a whole and complete
substance has the ratio of a last actus in the ratio of substantial
and essential actus, since it constitutes a certain ultimate species of
substance. Therefore, it cannot be related in the way of a substantial
potentia to the further form.
Finally, there is a general reason, since one and the same sub-
stance cannot be essentially and per se constituted in two ultimate
species. But it would be constituted in a proper and complete
species through any one of those forms. Therefore, those two forms
cannot be simultaneously conjoined to the same matter. Other-
wise, any substance, regardless how complete, could be actualized
through a further substantial form, since no better reason can be
given in one case than in another.
Also relevant here is that common argument that a form coming
to a being already constituted in actus cannot make something one
per se but only something one per accidens, according to Aristotle
in Metaphysics VII, text. 49, and De anima II, text. 7. For this
reason it cannot be a substantial form but only an accidental form,
since a substantial form constitutes something one per se rather
than something one per accidens. The reason is that substantial
form gives unqualified and essential being, and for that reason
cannot presuppose a thing constituted in unqualified being and
in a complete and consummate essence. But an accidental form
gives qualified being, which is joined per accidens to a consummate
essence. It is impossible, therefore, for the subject that is the
material cause of generable things and of substantial generation to
be a complete substance and to be constituted through a proper
and specific form.
12 [11]. And these arguments equally effectively show that that
subject cannot be a simple substance that is whole and complete
in a ratio and species of substance. For it would be impossible for
such a substance to be further actualized and completed through a
substantial form. For if this is repugnant to a composite substance,
it is much more so to a simple substance that through itself is in
complete and perfect actus. For that repugnancy does not arise
from composition, but from <406> complete actuality in a ratio and
essence of substance, which cannot within that genus be further

-- 8 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 9
actualized susbtantially and essentially. This argument of repug-
nance, moreover, has a place by the same or greater reason in the
case of simple substance, if a whole and complete being is supposed
in that genus of substance. By this reason an immaterial substance
cannot have the ratio of a substantial potentia to a further form,
since it is a complete simple susbtance. The same is true in the
case of celestial substance if it is physically simple, as many wish.
For it is complete in a certain species of substance and, therefore,
it cannot be further actualized substantially. Prime matter, there-
fore, which can be actualized substantially and which can compose
together with a substantial form a being that is one per se, cannot
be a simple substance of the sort that is whole and complete in the
genus of substance.
13 [12]. I say third: the material cause of generable things The third conclusion.
is not a substance composed of a substantial potentia and some
substantial form that is incomplete and quasi generic. Almost all the
authors endorse this assertion against Avicenna, especially those
who deny that there are multiple substantial forms in the same
composite, as St. Thomas does in ST Ia.76.3–4, in SCG II.58, and St. Thomas.
Capreolus.
Ferrarienses.
Cajetan.
Soncinas.
Javellus.
Soto.
Marsilius.
Astudillo.
Albert of Saxony.
Avicenna.
in Metaphysics VII, lect. 12. The Thomists follow him: Capreolus
in II, dist. 15, q. 1; Cajetan in the cited place in the first part of
ST and De anima II.1; Ferrariensis in the cited place from SCG;
Soncinas in Metaphysics VIII, q. 8; Javellus in q. 4; Soto in Physics
I, q. 7; Astudillo in De generatione I, q. 1; Marsilius in the same
place, q. 6; Albert of Saxony in q. 5; and, more widely, Giles of
Rome in De pluralitate formarum and in De anima II, dub. 6. The
same is taught by Philoponus in De generatione in the beginning
of book I; Themistius in Physics V, text. 7; and the Commentator
in De substantia orbis, in Metaphysics I, text. 17, and in Physics
I, text. 65 and 69. In fact, even Avicenna in De anima I, p. 1,
ch. 3, indicates that only the matter remains in corruption and
in The Book of Healing I, ch. 3, he questions whether corporeity
also passes away in corruption, as he himself said. Aristotle also
clearly indicates the same view in De generatione I, text. 12, and
in the other places cited above. Various arguments are made by
the doctors. Nevertheless, two suffice, since they can be taken with
proportion from the proofs for the previous assertion.
14 [13]. The first argument is that there is no indication in
nature of such a form that is coeval with and inseparable from
matter nor is there any effect for the sake of which it is necessary.
Therefore, <col. b> to imagine such a form is without foundation or
necessity. The antecedent is shown: for that form has no quality

-- 9 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 10
proper to it through which it is cognized nor can it be gathered
from substantial transformation. For all that can be gathered from
transformations of that sort is that there is some substantial subject
for it. But that it be composite is not necessary for it to have the
ratio of a subject and it cannot be inferred from any other indication.
You will say that being extended and divided from other things
is necessary for the ratio of a subject of physical change, and for
this it is necessary that it have some form. For matter alone through
itself does not have the capacity for extension and division, since it
is an actus that distinguishes. For this was the foundation of the
contrary view.
But this reason is of no moment, since either we suppose that in
the order of nature quantity and extension strictly precede substan-
tial generation in prime matter or we suppose that they follow on the
form introduced through generation and affect the whole composite.
In neither way is it necessary that the subject of generation be
a composite of matter and some form. Each part is shown: for if
quantity is presupposed for the form introduced through generation,
it can easily be understood as inhering in the entity of matter itself.
For, as we will show below, matter has true and substantial entity.
15 [14]. It is confirmed: for this composite of matter and the
form of corporeity that is being imagined is incomplete in what it is
and potential such that it naturally seeks a further form without
which it either cannot be at all or at least cannot be in a connatural
way. Nevertheless, it is said that this composite is by nature first
a sufficient subject of quantity before it receives a further form.
Therefore, it would be much better and easier to attribute that whole
capacity to the simple entity of matter, since no greater repugnancy
can be imagined with respect to this in simple entity than in that
composite. Nor will the actuality of such an entity, of whatever sort
it is, be more repugnant with union and per se composition with
an ultimate substantial form than the actuality of that composite
of matter and the form of corporeity. Therefore, that form is not
necessary according to this way of supposing.
Much less is it necessary if we suppose that quantity follows
the form that is introduced through generation. For according to
this view quantity in the order of nature presupposes a substance
composed of matter and proper form. Hence, according to this
opinion it should consequently be said that before <407> the intrin-
sic instant of generation, in the whole time in which the previous
alteration happens there is presupposed matter in itself extended
and divided from other things through the quantity and form of the

-- 10 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 11
thing that will be corrupted, but in the instant of generation it is
conserved extended and divided through the introduced form and
the quantity concomitant with it in the same instant. Therefore,
there is no natural effect and no sign by reason of which such a
form or composite on the part of matter should be admitted.
16 [15]. The second argument is that a form of this sort is
incompossible in matter with the subsequent forms. This is com-
monly shown from the maxima that something one per se does not
come to be from two entities in actus. For the first substantial form
constitutes a being in absolute and unqualified actus, since it gives
unqualified being. Therefore, no additional (superveniens form can
constitute a being that is one per se and unqualifiedly.
But it can be responded to this argument that it only proceeds
with respect to a substantial form that gives specific and ultimate
being. For a form that precisely gives generic being, then, although
it has the ratio of actus with respect to the matter, it nevertheless
is related as potentia to the lower form. And since it is of the same
genus, it will be able to constitute a being per se one with its actus.
For in this way these authors philosophize in the case of physical
forms just as we all argue in the case of metaphysical differences.
In the latter sort of case, the subalternate difference is the actus
actuating the higher genus and constituting a proper species. Yet
that species is a potentia towards a lower difference, with which
it metaphysically composes a being per se one. According to the
aforementioned view, the same thing should be said in the case of
physical forms. Hence, when it is said that every substantial form
constitutes a being unqualifiedly in actus, it will be responded that
this is true in due proportion. For a generic form constitutes a being
in actus in a generic grade, but a specific form in a specific grade.
And the maxim ‘that what comes to a being in actus comes to it
accidentally’.9
17 [16]. For this reason, in order to attack that view at the No form can precisely
give a generic grade.	root, we must prove that there cannot be a form that precisely gives
generic being lest it also give some specific being in that genus. For
once this has been proved, the given reasoning will proceed well
enough, since every substantial form constitutes a being unqual-
ifiedly in actus and in some ultimate species of substance. And
for this reason it is impossible for a composite constituted through
such a form to be further actualizable through a substantial form.
That assumption, moreover, <col. b> is proven first by induc-
9On the issue of how many substantial forms one substance has, see DM
15.10.

-- 11 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 12
tion, first in the case of accidental forms and then also in the case
of separate forms. For qualities are also conceived as giving specific
being (for example, being white) and generic being (for example,
being coloured, etc.), and yet there is no accidental form that in the
thing precisely gives generic being and not some specific being. Like-
wise, in the case of angels there is given the generic ratio of spirit
and the proper specific difference. But there cannot be—in fact,
there cannot be conceived—some separate form that is a spiritual
substance and that in the thing itself stops precisely in this generic
ratio. Therefore, for the same reason, in the case of substantial
forms, which are as it were intermediate no form can be given that
in the thing precisely gives a generic grade. For no reason can be
given for the difference.
Whence, I argue, second, from the proper ratio of the forms
themselves, since one cannot understand a form existing in the
thing itself that is not essentially constituted in some ultimate
species of substantial form. But every form communicates its
whole being and its whole essence to the composite. Therefore, it
constitutes the composite in some ultimate species of composite
substance. The consequence with the minor are evident and can
best be shown by the induction made in the first argument. But
the major also seems most certain, since every substantial form
has a proper entity distinct in the thing itself from matter or from
other forms. Therefore, it is necessary to understand in that en-
tity the ultimate and proper difference or ratio through which it
is essentially distinguished from the other forms having different
essences but with which it agrees in the common ratio of substantial
form. Therefore, every substantial form is necessarily constituted
according to its entity in some ultimate species of substantial form.
18 [17]. You will say: prime matter also has its own proper
substantial entity and yet according to itself is not constituted in
some ultimate species but is only reduced to the genus of material
substance until it is determined to some particular ratio through
form. Therefore, the same thing can be said about the form common
to coeval matter.
I respond that the assumption is false, for the prime matter The prime matter of
generables is a stable
indivisible and claims a
species for itself.
of generable things, which we are now discussing, is essentially
constituted in some ultimate species of matter. It retains this under
every form and cannot change it; at most it can be accommodated
to this or that form through superadded accidents. But since
<408> this essence of matter, although in itself it is specific and
ultimate, is such that it can itself really be communicated to multiple

-- 12 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 13
substances essentially diverse. For this reason, as far as it itself
is concerned, it is said to be reduced to the material substance
of generables as such and not to some species of that. From this
is gathered in passing that the concept of generable substance as
such is not generic by reason of matter but by reason of a common
grade or agreement in form.
19 [18]. You will press on and say that even if matter in its
essence has the ultimate specification of matter, it nevertheless is
common to multiple substances essentially diverse. Therefore by
equal reason although a form of corporeity in its entity and essential
concept has some ultimate specification, it nevertheless could be
common to multiple substances having further rationes essentially
diverse.
I respond that the reasons are not equal. For the essence of
matter is as it were the foundation of a whole substantial and
composite nature. For this reason it is only a kind of inchoate
essence (if I may put it this way) through the mode of potentia, and
for this reason it of itself is indifferent so that it may be completed
through different actus. Form, on the other hand, is the complement
of substantial nature and essence. For this reason, by the very
fact that it has a determinate and specific ratio of form, once it is
conjoined to matter it completes with it a whole substantial nature
and is constituted in some ultimate substantial species. For this
reason it does not leave that nature indifferent to a further species.
On account of this all those who posit a form of corporeity in all
things or in all natural things consequently say that that form is
precisely constituted in the subalternate grade of corporeity apart
from any essential contraction, which really is unintelligible.
20 [19]. And they consequently also admit that the composite
of matter and form of that sort, if it were conserved in reality apart
from a further form, is an individual of a genus of corruptible body
and not placed in any of its ultimate species. Moreover, that it
can be thus conserved in that way through [God’s] absolute power
seems evident, speaking consistently, since the lower forms really
are distinguished from that composite and a fortiori will be clear
from the things that we will say below about matter. But Scotus
also thinks it is possible naturally, as, for example, in the death of
a human being or other similar cases. For he admits substantial
corruption in that case without generation and that a cadaver is
nothing other than this individual body affected by these accidents
and not constituted in any lower <col. b> substantial species.
This consequence, however, to me seems in itself absurd and

-- 13 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 14
incredible. For no more can this individual body existing per se
without any specification be conceived than this spirit beyond all
species or this coloured thing affected by this colour but by no
species of colour. And the reason was given above. For individual
entity necessarily differs essentially from others and therefore it
is necessary that it in itself be constituted in a proper essence
not common to others. Hence, it is confirmed, for it follows from
the stated position that the generic and specific rationes are really
distinct in one and the same thing, since they are taken from really
distinct forms. But that the consequent is false is clear from what
was said above concerning universals and will also be shown in the
following arguments.
21 [20]. The third argument is taken from the difference between
essential composition that is physical and that is metaphysical. To
make these equivalent in this is the cause of the error, since one
composition exists in things but the other in concepts. For this
reason, I argue: for if physical form that only confers a generic
grade can be given, then really distinct substantial forms should be
multiplied to as many as there are generic and specific grades of
material substances. The conclusion is false. Therefore.
The inference is shown by equivalent reason. For what rea-
son can be offered on account of which a certain generic grade is
given through a really distinct proper form but not the other ones?
Especially given the fact that according to the view that we are
combatting the form that gives the being of a body is distinguished
from the form giving the being of fire or of a stone or others like
them not only in the case of things that seem to be elevated to a
higher grade of body (for example, living things) but also in the
case of the lowest inanimate bodies. This contraction exists with
the minimum of difference that there can be between some genus
and a substantial difference. If, therefore, that suffices for a real
distinction of forms, any difference whatever will suffice.
Hence, although philosophers who admit that conclusion are
not lacking, it is, nevertheless, not only false but also ridiculous. The absurdity from the
opinion of those
asserting a form of
corporeity.
First, because it stands evidently by the induction made earlier that
that real distinction of forms is not necessary for abstracting the
concepts of genus, difference, and species (for example, in the case
of angels and accidents).10 Second, because it follows that in the
case of human beings soul should be multiplied to three, which is a
view that is entirely false, as I assume from the science of <409>
the soul. In fact, they would have to be multiplied even more, since
10See n. 17.

-- 14 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 15
within the grade of sentient things some essential agreement can be
abstracted between human beings and some perfect animals that is
not common to all animals. And in the ratio of intelligent things a
generic ratio can be abstracted that is common to human beings and
angels but that is contracted through a proper difference to human
beings. Hence, it follows further that innumerable really distinct
forms must be asserted in individual composites. For generic and
specific differences can be multiplied in different ways according to
difference agreements and differences that can easily be considered
in things and according to which different common or particular
concepts can be abstracted.
It is, therefore, a serious error in metaphysics and philosophy Worthy of note.
to distinguish real and physical forms on account of our confused
or distinct way of conceiving from which the multiplication of genera
and differences often arises. Otherwise, not just one but two or
three forms of corporeity must be posited. One is of body in general
insofar as it is a genus of corruptible and incorruptible things,
simple or mixed. Another is of corruptible or mixed bodies as such.
All of these are ridiculous. Hence, not only is it not necessary to
multiply these forms on account of those operations of the mind, it
is also truly repugnant to them. For it belongs to the ratio of proper
genus and proper difference that they express the same essence of
a thing conceived in different ways.
22 [21]. This, finally, is confirmed: for it is impossible for
there to be a substantial form giving a specific grade of substance
that does not also give that generic grade and formal effect that is
thought to be a distinct form of corporeity. Therefore, such a form
is both superfluous and impossible.
The consequence is evident, because the same essential pred-
icate and the same formal effect cannot apply to the same thing
through two really distinct forms. The antecedent is proven: for
a substantial form that confers a specific grade and does not es-
sentially include the common and generic ratio of a substantial
form informing matter cannot be given; rather, precisely this ratio
is sufficient to constitute a form of corporeity. Therefore, the form
of corporeity is not a special form, but is any substantial form
whatever considered according to the common ratio of an informing
substantial form. The minor is proven (for the remaining premises
are clear): for precisely from the fact that some substance is un-
derstood a composite of <col. b> matter and substantial form, it
is essentially a corporeal substance or a body in the category of
substance. For from the force of such a composition it is both

-- 15 of 16 --

Suárez, DM XIII.3 16
essentially distinct from incorporeal substance and is capable of
quantity or the three dimensions in which the ratio of corporeal
substance consists. Hence, the form of corporeity as such does not
imply or require that it itself be corporeal or extended, but only that
it informs matter. In virtue of the composite resulting from that
informing, it is capable of the three dimensions. An intermediate
form that gives the generic being of a body is, therefore, neither
necessary nor possible. Rather, any substantial form by the force of
its generic ratio confers that [generic being].
23 [22]. What remains, then, from all that has been said is The conclusion is
inferred from all that
has been said.
that the first material cause of generable substances is not some
whole substance, nor is it any body or composite of matter and
form. And hence for the generation of substances, no ingenerable
and incorruptible body is presupposed in the mode of a subject in
which the generation is received. Only prime matter is presupposed.
(Only, I say, with respect to substance. For what should be said
with respect to accidents, we will see later.)

-- 16 of 16 --
