Last revision: November 14, 2014
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XIII.51
© Sydney Penner 2014
<414, col. b>
SECTION V.
Whether matter is pure potentia and in what sense that should be
accepted.
1. The solution to the arguments that were presented in the
previous section against our view depend on the resolution to the
present question. For it should not be denied by us that matter
is pure potentia2 since all the philosophers seem to agree in that
assertion. But the true meaning of that locution needs to be
explained.
Various views.
2. The disciples of St. Thomas, then, are commonly interpreted Capreolus in I, dist. 3,
q. 3, art. 2, and II, dist.
13, art. 3, and
Soncinas and Iavellus
in Metaphysics IX, q. 2
and in the other places
cited above.
as saying that matter is pure potentia because it does not have
any existence from itself or in itself except through form. On the
other hand, Scotus, Henry, and others cited above distinguish
two actus, namely, a formal actus and an entitative actus. And
they teach that matter has an entitative actus of itself but not a
formal actus. Consequently, they say that matter is called pure
potentia in relation to the formal actus but not in relation to the
entitative actus.
3. But certain modern authors, who do not dissent from Fonseca, Metaphysics I,
ch. 7, q. 3, §§7–8, and
the Coimbrans in
Physics I, ch. 9, q. 3,
art. 1.
1Translation is based on the 1597 edition. Paragraph numbering, however,
in which the 1597 and Vivés editions do not agree in this case, follows the
Vivés edition, since it is the most widely used edition (The 1597 paragraph
numbers are included in square brackets). Numbers in angle brackets also
indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference.
2Because they are the key technical terms and because it is unclear how
best to translate them, I will leave ‘actus’ and ‘potentia’ untranslated in this
section. Generally, ‘actus’ could have been translated either with ‘act’ or with
‘actuality’, while ‘potentia’ could have been translated either with ‘potency’ or
‘potentiality’. In other contexts, ‘potentia’ can also mean ‘power’ but that is
probably not the right translation in this context. Suárez also uses ‘actuali-
tas’, ‘potentialitas’, and cognates; these I will render into their closest English
cognates.

-- 1 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 2
Scotus in reality, do, nevertheless, disapprove of that way of
speaking. For they admit that matter has a proper existence
distinct from the existence of the form. Consequently, they teach
that matter actually is other than nothing. Yet they deny that
it should be called an entitative actus, first on account of the
argument made above that <415> there is neither an informing
actus nor a subsisting actus and also because, although matter
has an actus of existence proper to itself, it, nevertheless, is
not its own existence, since in every created thing existence is
distinguished ex natura rei at least from essence.
4 [3]. But still, if the thing that these authors teach does not
displease, I do not see why the way of speaking can displease.
For Aristotle does not oppose such a way of speaking, as we will
show, and it is not out of keeping with the common and received
use of the terms. For in as many ways as potentia can be said, in
so many ways actus can also be said. But a thing is said to be
in potentia, either in passive potentia because it can receive an
actus, in active potentia because it can effect, or in objective or
logical potentia because it would not be repugnant to be although
it is not. In the same way, therefore, a thing can be said to
be an actus or to be in actus either with respect to a receptive
potentia or with respect to an objective potentia, omitting active
potentia for now since it is not relevant at present. Therefore,
although prime matter is pure receptive potentia and thus in its
essence includes no formal actus (which is signified through the
expression ‘pure’), it can, nevertheless, after it is created not be
said to be in pure objective potentia. For this reason, therefore, it
is rightly said to be or to have an entitative actus.
5 [4]. Nor is it relevant that it is or is not by its own existence.
First, indeed, because when matter is called pure potentia, what
is denied is not only that it is actus but also that it is consti-
tuted from actus and potentia. Moreover, if matter has a proper
existence, even though in the end it is not its own existence,
nevertheless we cannot deny that it is constituted from its own
essence and existence. Therefore, it includes actus, for actual
existence is actus of an essence, according to everyone and espe-
cially according to that opinion. Therefore, matter cannot be said
to be pure potentia in relation to an entitative actus.
Also, according to that view, actus is not sufficiently divided
into formal and subsistent. For beyond those there is also the
actus of existence which is not subsistence since it is received
in the essence and it is not properly formal since it is not a

-- 2 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 3
form. But it can be said to be a terminative actus of essence.
Therefore, since matter insofar as it is really distinguished from
form includes this actus, it cannot be called pure potentia in
relation to entitative actus.
Furthermore, according to that view about the real or ex
natura rei distinction of existence from actual essence it cannot
be denied that actual essence as co-distinguished from existence
has some actuality that an essence <col. b> conceived only in
objective potentia does not have. Therefore, an actual essence,
even if it is not by its own existence, is some entitative actus,
that is, something other beyond pure objective potentia. In fact,
unless an actual essence is conceived in this way, one cannot
understand that opinion which distinguishes it from existence,
either as thing from thing or as from a real mode.
6 [5]. Whatever we think about the distinction between
essence and existence, then, matter as distinct from a form
in a thing is certainly some entitative actus, yet in a different
way. For those who do not distinguish ex natura rei existence
from essence but only in reason say that matter insofar as it is
an actual entity is by its own existence and actual essence which
are the same in the thing. And since, according to this opinion,
the entitative actus of a thing is nothing other than existence or
its actual entity, for this reason one rightly concludes that matter
is some entitative actus. But according to that other opinion
which distinguishes ex natura rei existence from actual essence
yet admits that prime matter has its own proper existence which
it retains under whatever form, one should say that matter is its
own actual essence beyond the actus of form and that it has a
proper actus of existence. But those who posit a real distinction
between essence and existence such that they deny that matter
has proper existence beyond the existence that is bestowed by
form consequently say that matter is pure potentia in relation to
formal actus as much as in relation to entitative actus or to the
actus of existence. Nevertheless, they cannot deny that there is
some actual entity in the being of the essence. Although, since
they think that the actuality of the essence wholly depends on
a distinct existence, for that reason they can say that matter,
even if in the thing it has the entity of an essence, nevertheless,
it is potential in such a way that it is not capable of existence
except by means of a form. And in this sense they can call it pure
potentia, even in relation to entitative actus.
7 [6]. Since, therefore, we think that matter has its own Matter existing per se
in a thing is an
entitative actus.

-- 3 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 4
partial existence and that the existence is not distinguished on the
part of the thing from the actual essence but is only distinguished
by our way of conceiving it, we also think it most true that matter
as it is an actual entity in the thing is also some entitative actus
in the thing. And according to reason or our way of conceiving
it is composed from being and essence as from a terminating
actus and an objective, as it were, potentia. <416> Each point
is sufficiently clear from what was just said about the preceding
view. Moreover, I always speak about matter as it is an actual
entity, since if it is conceived according to only that which it has
of itself, excluding every efficiency, in that way it has no actuality
in itself and is only in the force of a cause and of itself only has
a non-repugnancy to being. But this is not proper to matter,
for even form—in fact, every created thing considered in itself—
is pure potentia in this way. Therefore, one must speak about
matter as it is an actual entity, or, what is the same, insofar as it
has in itself a proper actus of existing distinct from the actus of a
form.
8 [7]. But in order to resolve the difficulties touched on in the
previous section and to explain the philosophers’ way of speaking
and to remove every ambiguity from the terms, I note that the
name ‘actus’ can be taken in different ways. For sometimes
it is said absolutely and sometimes respectively. Sometimes
something is called an actus because it actualizes something.
This is the way in which form is the actus of matter. And I call
this a respective actus, since it is the actus of something else.
But sometimes something is called an actus because it is in itself
something actual rather than potential, even though it does not
actualize anything else. This is the way in which God is called an
actus. And this I call an actus absolutely speaking.
In turn each of these actus can be subdivided. For a physical
and formal actualizing actus (for example, a physical form) is one
thing, but a metaphysical actus is another thing. The latter is
multiple: for one is the actus of essence (e.g., difference), another
is the actus of existence (e.g., existence), and the actus or mode
of subsistence can also be added. But actus said absolutely is
sometimes the actus of something else without qualification, but
sometimes the actus of something else with qualification. The
former is that actus which in the genus of being without qual-
ification or of substance is complete in such a way that it is
neither constituted through a physical actus distinct from it nor
actualized through it or requiring it for existence. Or it can be

-- 4 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 5
explained differently: that being is called an actus without qualifi-
cation which by the force of its own actuality includes the formal
perfection that other composite beings usually have through a
substantial informing actus. Hence although an absolute actus
of this sort is not an actualizing or informing actus, it can, nev-
ertheless, not be called a formal actus in the most eminent way,
that is, as having per se that complement of perfection that is
usually conferred through an informing actus on those things
that are completed through composition. But that being is called
a qualified actus which has some actuality insofar as it actually
is beyond nothing, yet has incomplete <col. b> and imperfect
actus, because it is not sufficient in such a way that it does not
need another actus both in order to be completed in the ratio of
being without qualification and also in order to exist.
The resolution of the question.
9 [8]. Therefore, it should be said, first, that matter is not called Matter does not
exclude every actus.	pure potentia with respect to every metaphysical actus, that is,
because it includes no metaphysical actus. For this cannot be
true. First, because prime matter in its essential concept cannot
be understood to be composed from genus and differences, as, for
example, if the matter of the heavens and of these lower things
were distinguished in species, the matter of generable things that
we are talking about now would be composed of the genus of
matter in general and the proper difference that can be taken
from its relation to the form of generable being. This matter,
therefore, has its own metaphysical formal actus, by which it is
constituted in its essence.
And it is confirmed: for matter by its nature has some per-
fection and transcendental goodness, as St. Thomas also teaches St. Thomas.
in SCG 3 ch. 20. For it is certain that a composite of matter and
form is something more perfect than a form by itself.3 Therefore,
matter has something of perfection that it adds to the composite.
Likewise, matter itself is desirable and agreeable, not only as a
means but per se, since by reason of its perfection it is agreeable
to this form or composite. Matter, therefore, has by its own nature
some proper perfection. But perfection cannot be understood
without some actuality, at least transcendental actuality.
Furthermore, matter has a proper actus of existence, as was
shown.
3See DM 15.7.6.

-- 5 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 6
Finally, it has a partial and proportionate actus of subsis-
tence. For it entirely needs that in order to be a first subject. For
a first subject stands underneath everything, but to subsist in
itself comes before standing under other things. We will say more
about this below when discussing subsistence. Therefore, prime
matter cannot be pure potentia in such a way that it excludes
every metaphysical actuating actus.
10 [9]. I say, second: matter is not such a pure potentia Which actus matter
admits.	that there is not some qualified entitative actus. This assertion
was sufficiently shown and proven from what was said about the
opinion of Scotus. And it is sufficiently gathered from the ratio of
a first subject: for it is necessary that in a first subject there be a
real passive potentia, or, rather, it itself essentially is a passive
potentia. Nor can a real passive potentia be understood without
some <417> entitative actuality. For how can it be understood
that something truly and really is receptive to something else
without itself being something? Hence, the Commentator rightly Commentator.
says in On the Heavens III, comm. 29, that every passive poten-
tiality is grounded in some actuality. And St. Thomas says in
ST Ia.46.1 ad 1 that matter is not called being in potentia in the
way in which possible being is called in potentia solely from the
non-repugnance of the terms. He, therefore, presupposes that
there is some being actually grounding the real passive poten-
tia, or, rather, that there is a real passive power in the genus of
substance.
11 [10]. I say, third: matter is said to be pure potentia with In what way matter is
pure potentia.	respect to informing or actualizing actus and with respect to
actus speaking absolutely and without qualification. It is shown:
for in the first place, matter is neither an actualizing nor an
informing actus, as is clear per se from the ratio of a first subject.
Furthermore, it does not include in its intrinsic and essential
concept a physical informing actus. For we showed that it is
a simple entity, which is also gathered from the ratio of a first
subject. In addition, matter is such an entity that it is not per
se sufficient for existing without a substantial actus perfecting
and actualizing it. Hence, it formally or eminently includes no
formal actus by the force of its own precise entity. And, therefore,
it is not an actus absolutely and without qualification. Finally,
whatever the entity is in prime matter, it is entirely for exercising
the function (munus) of a power receptive to a substantial form.
For this is what it was primarily and per se made for. For this
reason, as we said above, it includes in its essential ratio a

-- 6 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 7
transcendental disposition (habitudinem) to form.
From these things, therefore, it is clear that it is deservedly
called pure potentia in the genus of substance and is best ex-
plained in the stated way. For, since matter is a simple entity
and is in its entirety a receptive potentia, it is very well called
pure potentia. Moreover, just as it is customarily said that an
exclusive expression does not exclude concomitants, so also the
expression ‘pure’ does not exclude the qualified entity and actual-
ity necessary for the ratio of a real potentia. But it does exclude
in particular every other function besides passive potentialities
and, furthermore, it excludes the ratio of a completed actus or an
unqualified actus, speaking absolutely. And, what comes to the
same thing, it excludes every formal actus, both as properly in-
forming and as unqualifiedly constituting a perfect and complete
actus.
12 [11]. <col. b> But for the sake of considering the use of What the difference is
between being potentia
and being in potentia.
words, speaking strictly, one thing is signified when matter is
called pure potentia and another thing if it said to be in pure
potentia. For the first is strictly true and has the legitimate sense
just explained. But the second is at the very least ambiguous.
For to be in pure potentia taken strictly signifies the privation of
actual existence. For this reason it is usually said only of that
which actually is nothing yet could be. But that cannot be said of
matter after it is created or co-created. For although it is nearly
nothing, it nevertheless is not nothing but a true thing, as we
said earlier with Augustine.
We can distinguish in a similar way between the locutions ‘to ‘Being actus’ and ‘being
in actus’ differ.	be in actus’ and ‘to be actus’. For ‘matter is in actus’ is strictly
true, since it signifies nothing other than that there is matter
in the nature of things and that it exists, which is true, just as
it is true that matter is created, receives form, and composes
a composite. All of those include its existing. But ‘matter is
actus’ is at the very least ambiguous. For in an absolute sense it
seems to signify that it is an actualizing actus or certainly that
it is an unqualified actus. And for this reason it should not be
taken absolutely, but it should be taken with some diminishing
addition, namely, that it is an entitative actus that is imperfect
and qualified.
13 [12]. Moreover, that this explanation of matter in the The just given
explanation of the
potentia of matter
agrees with Aristotle.
nature of pure potentia is harmonious with what Aristotle and
other philosophers said is obvious. For in Physics I, text. 69,
when comparing prime matter to the matter of artefacts, he says

-- 7 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 8
that it is related to form and essence strictly speaking as wood
to a statue or to the form of a statue. From this he concludes
that matter is what is formless. Through this and other similar
expressions he only excludes from matter every formal and com-
plete actus, but not the entitative actus, incomplete and inchoate,
as it were, without which it could not be a real receptive potentia.
Furthermore, it is understood from the definition of matter
that he gives in Physics I.9, text. 82, where he says that matter is
‘the first subject, from which something per se comes to be, since
it is in it’. For matter is said to be in the produced thing, since it
remains through its own entity in the produced thing, composing
the latter through itself. And in that very place Aristotle says
that matter according to its own entity is prior to the produced
thing and is ungenerable and incorruptible. And, finally, he says
that matter is a being per se, but per accidens is not a being by
reason of privation.4 Therefore, he does not exclude <418> every
entitative actuality from matter, but only the formal [actuality] to
which it is in potentia.
Finally, in Metaphysics VII and in other places, when he says
that matter is not a certain quantity or a certain kind or a this
something, he only excludes the composition resulting from an
informing actus and every formal actus from the entity of the
matter. Nor is anything else really necessary for the function
and office of matter, as is clear from the reason that Plato also Plato.
Aristotle.	reports in Timaeus and from him Aristotle in On the Heavens
III.8, namely, because that which is receptive to other things
must not actually have that to which it is susceptible but only
have it potentially. But matter is susceptible to formal actus and
complete being. Therefore, it must be said to be pure potentia
with respect to these, but not with respect to the entity properly
its own.
In addition, Averroes says in the same sense that matter Averroes.
St. Thomas.	substands through being able, since it substance such that its
whole [entity] is ordered to receiving, and for this reason it is
essentially incomplete and potential. And St. Thomas explains
the potentiality of matter in the same way in De spiritualibus
creaturis, art. 1, citing Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram I.14–15.
The arguments remaining from the previous section are resolved.
4Compare to modern translations of 192a4–5.

-- 8 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 9
14 [13]. Through these things, then, there is a sufficient response Matter is
metaphysically
composed from actus
and potentia, but not
physically.
to all the testimonies that were presented against our view in the
preceding section. Indeed, even the arguments are also almost
resolved, for they at best show that matter is pure potentia, but
not in any other sense that the one that we explained. This will
become clearer by responding in form to the argument made
there.
For when it is said that matter is not composed of actus and
potentia, we concede that that is true concerning proper physical
actus and potentia. But it must be conceded that metaphysically
matter is composed from actus and potentia proportionate to it,
that is, from genus and difference, essence and existence, nature
and incomplete subsistence. But when it is inferred that there
is a potentia prior to matter, it is responded that with respect
to physical potentia this is disagreeable and plainly repugnant.
Nevertheless, that does not follow from what was said, since we
do not say that matter is composed of physical potentia and actus.
But if the discussion is about metaphysical potentia, it thus is
true that matter in general is conceived as prior than this species
of matter, and the essence of matter is conceived as prior to its
existence, not insofar as it is a being actually but absolutely.
Likewise, the nature <col. b> of matter is in some genus prior to
its partial subsistence. Nevertheless, taken strictly, it does not
follow that there is given in the thing itself some potentia prior
to matter, but in the matter itself there is given one ratio prior
to another. Yet in that ratio that is conceived as prior there is
always included the potentia of matter itself, either confusedly
(as in the concept of matter in general) or as possible (as in the
precise concept of the essence of matter or through the mode of
a partial nature only, considered apart from the partial mode of
subsisting).
15 [14]. But to the second part by which it was proved
that matter in no way is an actus, we concede that it is not
an actualizing or informing actus and that it is not an actus
unqualifiedly complete and perfect in itself. What the arguments
by which this was proven there show at most is that matter is not
a subsisting actus, but they do not show that matter is not an
incomplete and entitative actus. In this sense, therefore, I deny
that a partial entity or subsisting actus is more perfect than any
informing actus whatever since that partial entity participates less
in the ratio of actus than an informing actus does. Furthermore, I
deny that an incomplete subsisting actus cannot be given. For the

-- 9 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 10
very subsisting essence of matter is a proper partial subsistence,
and with that having been added it can be designated an actus
in a respect, that is, with respect to its own entity, by which it is
separated from nothing and from [merely] possible being.
But all the remaining things that were brought up there
proceed with respect to complete actus subsisting and including
formal actus through a simple and more excellent mode. And
in the same sense what was supplied in a certain confirmation Whether every actus is
a principle of some
operation.
in that very place—namely, that every actus is the principle of
some operation—is true. For that is true concerning actus that
are formal or informing or subsisting completely. Yet it is not
necessary that it be universally true of every partial and entitative
actus, since it is not necessary that every entity be the principle of
some operation properly and in the genus of efficient cause. For it
could have been made for exercising another genus of cause. And
thus the entity of matter is for receiving rather than for acting.
Objections to the above resolution.
16 [15]. But there are still some other objections yet to be resolved,
objections that are customarily made against the last assertion
of this section. First, because apart from being there is no actus,
since nothing has actuality except insofar as it is. For this reason
being itself is the actuality of all things,<419> as St. Thomas says
in ST Ia.4.1 ad 3. But matter does not have being except through
a form, as Avicenna says in Metaphysics II.2. And Boethius says
in On Unity and the One5 that all being in created things is from
form. Therefore.
Second, because otherwise nothing per se one would come
about from matter and form. For something per se one does not
come to be from two beings in actus. This is the reason why
nothing per se one comes to be from a subject and an accident,
since it is one thing to be a subject and another thing to be an
accident.
Third, physical matter is entirely simple. Therefore, either it is
entirely actus or entirely potentia, since a simple entity cannot be
composed of a physical actus and potentia. But that it is entirely
actus cannot be said, since it is essentially potentia. Therefore, it
is entirely potentia and includes no actus.
Fourth, because pure actus is actus in such a way that it has
5This work is now ascribed to Domenicus Gundissalinus, a twelfth century
philosopher in Spain.

-- 10 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 11
nothing of potentiality or receptive potentia mixed in. Therefore,
contrariwise, pure potentia is potentia in such a way that it has
nothing of actuality mixed in. For they have the character of
opposites, and pure potentia must stand maximally apart from
pure actus. But pure potentia would not stand maximally apart
if it were to include something of actuality.
Fifth, because if matter is something actual, then it is either
a substance or an accident. But it is not the second, as is
obvious per se. But neither is it the first, since it is a potentia
for substance. But that which is a potentia for something is not
actually that, since these two are repugnant [to each other].
Last, because otherwise matter could be cognized per se and
directly and by a proper cognition, which the philosophers seem
universally to deny with Aristotle and Plato in the cited passages.
17 [16]. The first and second objections will receive a full In what way every
being is from form.	explicit treatment below in the disputation on the essence and
being of creatures.6 For now the principle that ‘every being is
from form’ can briefly be explained in two ways. The first is about
specific and complete being. The second is that every being is
from form either intrinsically giving and composing it or at least
terminating its dependency in some way. And in this way the
being of matter can be said to be from form insofar as it depends
on it, as was said.
But the other axiom that ‘something per se one does not come How one should
understand that
something per se one
does not come to be
from two entities in
actus.
to be from two beings in actus’ cannot be understood about any
actual entities. Rather, it is impossible that a being per se and
complete actually be composed except from incomplete actual
beings. For what is nothing, as we have often said, cannot really
compose [anything] and, in particular, not a being per se one.
<col. b> Therefore, the axiom must be understood as concerning
beings complete in actus in their genera. For those are not order
per se and do not cohere in the right way for composing a being
per se one. We do not say, however, that matter is in this way a See DM 4 concerning
per se unity.	being in actus, but instead we say that it is, as it were, a certain
kind of inchoate being that is naturally inclined to and per se
conjoined with form as completing an integral being, as we will
explain more fully later.
18 [17]. To the third objection, it is responded that matter is
entirely potentia and entirely actus in the way that we explained,
not through a composition of actus with potentia but through
identity and (if I may speak in this way) through intimate and
6DM 31.

-- 11 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 12
transcendental inclusion. For not every potentia is opposed to
every actus, but with proportion. Consequently, receptive po-
tentia is not opposed to incomplete entitative actus, but rather
essentially includes it.
19 [18]. To the fourth objection, it is said, first, that just as How pure potentia is
equal to pure actus.	pure actus includes no potentia receptive to another actus, so also
pure potentia includes no actus actualizing something. In this
respect the analogy holds, but not with respect to entitative actus.
Hence, if this is what the discussion is about, the consequence
is denied, since it involves the repugnance that there is a real
receptive potentia, however pure, without intimately including
the actuality of being.
But, the other way around, it is not repugnant to include the
actuality of being in such a way that it involves no potentiality.
For potentiality expresses imperfection, but it is not repugnant for
there to be perfection so pure that it excludes every imperfection.
But it is repugnant for there to be real imperfection so pure that it
is without any perfection. For it would rather be nothing and the
pure negation of every perfection. Hence, just as the theologians
say that there is a highest good that includes no evil and yet there
is no highest evil such that it has no goodness or is not founded
in it. Thus, although a pure actus that excludes all potentia be
given, yet a pure potentia that excludes all actuality, including
entitative and incomplete actuality, cannot be given.
But the objection was also raised concerning the highest
distance between pure potentia and pure actus. This can be
resolved, first, by denying that it belongs to the ratio of pure
potentia to be maximally distance from pure actus. For celestial
matter is pure potentia and yet is not maximally distant from
pure actus. For the matter of these lower things is more distant,
since it is more imperfect. And so far it is uncertain whether
there could be other matter less perfect than this lower matter
and consequently <420> even farther from the perfection of God
than prime matter. Accidents are also more distant than prime
matter from divine perfection. Two kinds of distance can also
be distinguished: one can be called negative, which is the sort
of distance there is between being and nothing, and the other
positive on the part of two extremes. Therefore, it does not belong
to the ratio of pure potentia to be distant from God in the first
way, but rather in the second way. And for this reason, although
we admit that pure potentia is maximally distant from pure actus,
it does not follow that pure potentia includes no actuality, since

-- 12 of 13 --

Suárez, DM XIII.5 13
that distance is not the highest compared to a negative but [a
comparison] between two positives. For this reason it requires
some agreement between the extremes in entity, even if that
agreement is minimal.
20 [19]. To the fifth objection, it is responded that matter is
a substance, as Aristotle explicitly teaches in Metaphysics VIII
from the beginning, and in many other places. Hence, matter is
not in potentia for the whole breadth of substance but for form
and for the being of the composite. But it is not in potentia for
the substantial entity of matter, but actually is such entity. For
it is repugnant that there be given a real potentia receptive with
respect to the entire genus and breadth of substance so that it
includes complete and incomplete substance. For substance is
prior to accident. And for this reason such a potentia, since it is
the first subject, cannot be an accident but must be a substance.
Nor can it be in potentia to itself. Therefore, it cannot be in
potentia to the entire breadth of substance. In this there is a
great difference between substantial form and accidental form.
For an accidental form presupposes a being of a more noble
genus, namely, substance. For this reason it can happen that
a subject or potentia for an accident not be an accident in any
way, that is neither complete nor incomplete. But a substantial
form does not presuppose a being of a more noble genus. For
this reason a potentia for such a form cannot be anything other
than some substance, at least incomplete.

-- 13 of 13 --
