Last revision: October 13, 2015
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XIII.21
© Sydney Penner 2014
<399, col. a>2
SECTION II.
Whether the material cause of generable and corruptible substances
is single or multiple.
1. In this section and the following one we will briefly touch on
the opinions of the ancient philosophers, whom Aristotle investi- Aristotle.
gates more thoroughly and opposes in various places, especially in
Metaphysics I.3 ff.; Physics I.2; On Generation and Corruption I.1
ff.; and On the Heavens III.7. The same things can be read about
in Diogenes Laërtius, Lives of the Philosophers; Plato, Theaetetus
and Sophist; Plotinus Enneads 9.2; Theophrastus, <col. b> Meta-
physics, ch 3; and Plutarch, On the Opinions of the Philosophers3
I.3. Among the Fathers, it is touched on in Augustine, On the City of
God at the beginning of book VIII; Epiphanius [of Salamis], Panarion
III.80; Irenaeus, Against Heresies II.19; Clement of Rome, Recogni-
tions; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata I; Eusebius, Preparations for
the Gospel at the beginning of book XIV; and Ambrose, Hexameron
I.2. The views of these philosophers can be gathered under two
headings: one for those who posit multiple material first principles
(which we will discuss here) and the other for those who only posit
one but err in assigning it (which we will discuss in the following
section).
The view of those positing infinite material principles.
2. The first view, then, was that the material cause of everything con-
sists of indivisible corpuscles or atoms, which Leucippus, Democri- Leucippus.
Democritus.
Epicurus.
Metrodorus.
Anaxagoras.
tus, Epicurus, Metrodorus, and Anaxagoras posited to be infinite.
Almost all of them thought these corpuscles to be similar to each
other and of the same ratio, and that they composed different beings
1Translation is based on the 1597 edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3This work is no longer thought to be by Plutarch.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, DM XIII.2 2
only through variety in position, figure, and order. They thought
that corruption of things was nothing other than the scattering and
disorder of atoms but that generation is a new composition of them.
But Anaxagoras posited atoms that are partly similar and partly
dissimilar, so that homogeneous things come to be from similar
atoms and dissimilar things from dissimilar atoms as in the case of
heterogeneous parts of organic bodies (for example, flesh from flesh
atoms, but bone from bone atoms, and so on for the others).
In turn, certain of them seem to have posited these atoms as
wholly indivisible. For this reason, in order so that those atoms can
compose a body, they said the body coalesces not only from those
atoms but also from some emptiness or void. For if they were all
immediately and solidly conjoined, a large mass would never accrete,
as is taken from Aristotle, Metaphysics I.4. But others seem not to
have thought them mathematically indivisible but only physically
indivisible. According to this interpretation it is not necessary to
place some void between those atoms in order for the magnitude of
a body to increase from them.
In turn, some of these philosophers did not posit any efficient
cause beyond these atoms nor any final cause. Rather, they thought
that some things dissolve from the various coming together of these
atoms and from their perpetual movement, and other things spring
up by chance. And for this reason, as <400> Aristotle relates, Epi- In the cited places and
in Metaphysics IV.1.	curus said that these corpuscles have a natural weight by which all
things are brought about. But others, such as Anaxagoras, posited
an efficient cause acting with intellect and will, and composing
different things from these corpuscles.
3. But that part pertains to the disputations about the efficient The proposed view is
refuted.	and final causes. Now, as far as the present issue is concerned,
these philosophers do not, in the first place, think that there is a
true material cause, which is a potency physically receptive of any
act. For those atoms are not in potency to receiving some physical
form. Nor can they be called the matter of a whole composite except
in the way in which integral parts are called the matter of the whole
and the way in which stones and wood are called the matter of a
house.
A further result is that according to that way of philosophizing
the forms of natural beings are, as it were, only artificial forms,
namely, a kind of figure arising from the different positions and
orderings of atoms. And thus there will be no true substantial The absurdity following
from a view asserting
that atoms are the
material cause.
generation and corruption, but only various coordinations and
dissolutions of atoms. And, although Anaxagoras posits atoms

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, DM XIII.2 3
of different rationes, nevertheless, it is necessary to posit all [of
them] confused and mixed together in individual things so that
through their being drawn out one thing can be generated from
another. And thus all things differ only in that certain things have
certain atoms more openly or in more exterior parts while others
are more concealed or in more hidden parts, which difference is
only one of position and coordination of atoms. Add that it cannot
be understood how such different corpuscles having repugnant
conditions are intimately conjoined in individual things. It is no less
inexplicable how these hidden corpuscles could be brought to light
from some thing or other so that other things seem to be generated
or, rather, composed.
4. Another thing that is absurd in all these philosophers is
that they posit an infinite multitude of these corpuscles. For either
they think that there is an infinite multitude of these atoms in
individual natural entities or only in the whole universe while there
is only a finite multitude in individual bodies or their parts. The
view in the former sense is utterly absurd. For it cannot be that
infinite atoms compose some body, unless they grow into an infinite
magnitude. For if <col. b> atoms are not fashioned mathematically
indivisible but physically indivisible, each will have some magnitude.
Either they will all have equal magnitude, since there is no ratio of
inequality, or at least a minimal atom can be assigned to which all
the others will be equal or greater. Therefore, an infinity of atoms of
this sort necessarily compose an actually infinite magnitude.
But if the atoms are mathematically indivisible, they cannot
compose a magnitude except empty space be interposed, which
space will be divisible and of some magnitude. From this it is
likewise concluded that an infinity of atoms thus distant from each
other necessarily effect an infinite body, occupying or including
infinite space, partly empty and partly filled with atoms.
Nor can a counterexample be produced from the infinite points
existing in a line. For in that case there are no immediate points,
since the whole line is continuous. But in the case of the atoms
it would be necessary—given that any designated atom be some
proximate distance from it through a some certain and definite
distance and so on for the remaining ones—it would therefore be
necessary that those infinite corpuscles occupy infinite space in
that way.
5. But the view taken in the latter sense is also improbable.
In the first place, all the things that Aristotle writes in Physics III
and On the Heavens I against the infinite magnitude of the world

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, DM XIII.2 4
go against it. Furthermore, it is evident that the whole sphere
of generable and corruptible things is finite, since it ends at the
sphere of the moon. To attribute a composition from atoms to the
heavens and to extend those to infinity cannot be philosophical,
since neither experience nor reason can lead us to thinking that.
Finally, if some body of finite magnitude is constituted of only
a finite number of atoms, then this fashioning of atoms cannot
suffice for the generations and corruptions of things. First, because
almost an infinite variety of things can be generated from the same
thing. Also, because the magnitude of a body must always be
greatly diminished in any generation and corruption through the
dissipation of atoms, yet experience makes clear that that does not
always happen. Unless perhaps it is said that a certain rotation of
atoms, as it were, always comes to be, while the interior atoms are
drawn out to the external parts while the exterior ones are pushed
to the inmost parts, and for that reason the magnitude of the thing
is not diminished. But nothing could be more absurd than this.
For whence does it happen that nothing of the thing itself can be
changed except according to place or external appearance. And
that drawing out and pushing in of atoms is contrary to experience.
<401> For when fire is generated from flax, the generation happens
not only in the exterior parts but in the inmost parts and in the
whole magnitude. And when a human being dies, the corruption
happens in all the parts, in the internal parts as much as in the
external parts. This view, therefore, is utterly absurd. Nor does
it have any foundation that is necessary to address. For we will
explain later what the true sense is of the principle ‘out of nothing
nothing comes’, the principle in which the cited philosophers are
grounded as much as others.
The opinion of those positing multiple but finite principles.
6. The second view also posits multiple principles or multiple
first material causes of generable things, but only a finite number.
Empedocles thinks this. He says that the four elements—fire, air, Empedocles.
water, and earth—are the four first material causes out of which
mixtures are generated. But those four do not have a prior cause or
material principle.
Nevertheless, this view is false and can obviously be refuted. The preceding view is
refuted.	For in the first place, although it touches on the composition or
generation of mixtures from elements, it does not, however, consider
the transformation of the elements into each other. Yet it is clear

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, DM XIII.2 5
that air is converted into fire and water into earth and conversely.
But the elements cannot be the material principle of this kind of
transformation. Rather, there must be some subject common to all
of them.
But perhaps Empedocles thinks that the elements are not trans-
formed substantially and for this reason are not constituted of
matter and substantial form but are a kind of wholly simple being
subject to accidents. But against this we will in the first place show
below that it is no less certain that there are substantial forms of
the elements than of any other natural beings and, consequently,
that they are truly and substantially transformed into each other.
Furthermore, even if we were to admit that [the elements are not
transformed substantially], that would be no reason to multiply
material principles or first substantial subjects. Rather, one should
then say that there is one and the same substantial subject in all
the elements, which is called distinct elements when affected by
different accidents. And since that subject would also be the mate-
rial principle of mixtures, the result is that in the thing itself and
substantially there is only one first material cause for all things.
7. But suppose Empedocles were to say that that diversity
of natural accidents <col. b> that is observed in the elements
sufficiently indicates an essential distinction between substantial
subjects. From this is taken an effective argument ad hominem.
When air is transformed from fire such that it remains affected by
the proper accidents of the fire, not only does a change happen
in the accidents but also in the substance itself. But it cannot
happen in the whole substantial entity on account of the reasons
given in the section above concerning annihilation and creation.4 It
is necessary, therefore, also to admit that there is in the elements
some subject prior to them and common to them by reason of
which they can be mutually transformed. Therefore, they are not
first material causes, but something else is prior to them out of
which they are constituted. And from this it is also concluded that
these elements are not the first material causes of mixtures, since
in them themselves is given a prior matter for them. That prior
matter is also a material cause of the mixtures, since it remains
in them and is informed by their forms. That, therefore, is also
the first cause in that order of the mixtures, especially in view of
the fact that according to the true view the elements do not remain
formally in the mixture. That is, they do not remain according to the
proper substantial forms, since the substantial form of a mixture
4DM 13.1.6.

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, DM XIII.2 6
cannot fall (if I may speak in this way) above the form of an element
or inform matter as already informed by the form of an element.
Therefore, the elements according to their proper substances are
not enduring and proper material causes of mixtures. But the same
matter that is the first material cause of the elements themselves is
also the first material cause of the mixtures.
The resolution of the question.
8. It should be said, therefore, that there is only one prime matter or
first material cause of all sublunar things. This is the common view
of all the philosophers to whom we refer in the following [sections]. It
is sufficiently proven by the argument already made against Empe-
docles and by the latter discussion given in the previous section,
where we show from the common and mutual transformation of
sublunar things that there is a common matter. For that argument
equally proves that the subject that remains under all these trans-
formations is only one, both because the contrary principles from
which generations and corruptions come about must concern the
same thing and also because that subject is of itself indifferent to
any forms whatsoever of corruptible things and to their dispositions.
And therefore no distinction or multiplication in it is required. In
fact, there is nothing from which it would have that. Conversely,
every <402> form of a generable thing of any species can be intro-
duced in any part whatsoever of this matter, if it is appropriately
disposed. This is a sign that this matter in itself is one and of the
same ratio and sufficient in its genus for causing all the effects that
can be materially caused in these things if the other causes in the
other necessary genera are applied or concur.
9. The only possible objection is that, since the material cause An objection is
addressed.	is intrinsic and essential and since these generable and corruptible
things are essentially diverse, therefore one and the same matter
cannot be in all of them. But this objection touches on the question
whether matter is a part of the quiddity of material substances.
We will discuss this question below in the more appropriate place. DM 39.2.
For now it is briefly responded that the essences of these material
things are diverse or dissimilar with respect to forms but similar
with respect to prime matter. Nor does this pose any obstacle
to essential difference. For essential diversity does not exclude
agreement and similarity in some part.

-- 6 of 6 --
