Sydney Penner
Last revised: Feb. 9, 2008
Francisco Su´arez, S. J.
DM XXIII, SECT. 81
WHETHER THE END MOVES ACCORDING TO ITS OWN REAL BEING OR ACCORDING TO
BEING COGNIZED (Utrum finis moveat secundum suum esse reale, vel secundum esse
cognitum)
1. The former view.—The first view affirms that the end moves according to the being that
it has in cognition, not according to being real and indeed the cognition is not so much
a condition sine qua non, but is the formal nature of causing finally. This is thought to be
by Avicenna, Metaph. VI, c. 5, and Soncinas holds it in Metaph. V, q. 3, and several other
modern Thomists. And they attribute to St. Thomas, [ST] IaIIæ.31.3 ad 1, where he says:
‘the object of animal appetite is apprehended good and therefore a diversity of apprehen-
sions pertain in a certain way to a diversity of objects.’ And similarly in [ST] Ia.80.1 and
2 he says that the appetite is varied according to the form or apprehension which is fol-
lowed and thus he distinguishes three appetites: natural [appetite], sensitive [appetite],
and will. For the first follows natural form apart from apprehension, the second fol-
lows the form apprehended through sense, and the third follows the form apprehended
through intellect.
Prior sententia.—Prima sententia affirmat finem movere secundum esse quod
habet in cognitione, non secundum esse reale; atque adeo cognitionem non
tantum esse conditionem sine qua non, sed esse formalem rationem causandi
finaliter. Haec censetur esse Avicen., VI Metaph., c. 5, eamque tenet Sonci-
nas, V Metaph., q. 3, et nonnulli alii moderni2 thomistae; et attribuunt D.
Thomae, I-II, q. 31, a. 3, ad 1, ubi ait obiectum appetitus animalis esse bonum
apprehensum, et ideo diversitatem apprehensionis pertinere quodammodo ad diversi-
tatem obiecti. Et similiter I, q. 80, a. 1 et 2, ait appetitum variari iuxta formam
vel apprehensionem quam sequitur, et ita distinguit tres appetitus, naturalem,
sensitivum et voluntatem; nam primus sequitur naturalem formam absque
apprehensione, secundus sequitur formam apprehensam per sensum, tertius
sequitur formam apprehensam per intellectum.
2. The first reason for this view can drawn from this doctrine. For that which is distin-
guished essentially on the part of the object from appetite is not only a condition, but
also a formal reason of moving or the object of the moving. But diverse apprehension
1Latin text is from http://perso.wanadoo.es/v963918818/d23.htm. Retrieved Feb. 5, 2008.
2Changed from ‘modemi’.

-- 1 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 2
is sufficient reason for distinguishing essentially from appetite. Therefore. The minor is
from St. Thomas above. But the major is clear from the common doctrine that powers are
distinguished through formal objects not through the conditions of the objects. Hence, St.
Thomas in the cited place, when he has said in the body of the article that the appetite
is the power of motion but that it is moved by an apprehended appetible and therefore
through that is distinguished, he applies it in the solution to the first [argument]:
The appetible does not accidentally happen to be apprehended through sense
or intellect, but agrees to it per se. For the appetible does not move the ap-
petite except insofar as it is apprehended. Hence, differences in the thing ap-
prehended are per se differences in the appetible. Hence, appetitive powers
are distinguished according to the difference of apprehensions as according to
their proper objects.’
And St. Thomas has the same in [ST] IaIIæ.30.3 ad 2, where he similarly distinguishes
natural concupiscences from unnatural ones by diverse apprehensions. And Cajetan ob-
serves here that he was manifestly held by this response: ‘that apprehension with respect
to the object of appetite does not hold itself as an approach of the active to the passive but
as objective reason.’
Ex qua doctrina potest concipi prima ratio pro hac sententia; nam id quod
ex parte obiecti distinguit essentialiter appetitus, non est tantum conditio,
sed etiam formalis ratio movendi, seu obiecti moventis; sed apprehensio di-
versa est sufficiens ratio distinguendi essentialiter appetitus; ergo. Minor est
D. Thomae supra. Maior vero constat ex communi doctrina, quod potentiae
distinguuntur per obiecta formalia, non per conditiones obiectorum. Unde D.
Thomas citato loco, cum dixisset in corpore articuli appetitum esse potentiam
motam, moveri autem appetibili apprehenso et ideo per illud distingui, subdit
in solutione ad primum: Appetibili non accidit esse apprehensum per sensum vel
intellectum, sed per se ei convenit. Nam appetibile non movet appetitum nisi in quan-
tum est apprehensum, unde differentiae apprehensi sunt per se differentiae appetibilis.
Unde potentiae appetitivae distinguuntur secundum differentiam apprehensorum si-
cut secundum propria obiecta. Et idem habet D. Thomas, I-II, q. 30, a. 3, ad 2, ubi
similiter ex diversa apprehensione distinguit concupiscentias naturales a non
naturalibus; et Caiet. ibi notat ex illa responsione manifeste haberi quod appre-
hensio respectu obiecti appetitus non se habet ut approximatio activi ad passivum, sed
ut ratio obiectiva.
3. And this reason is confirmed: for in the same intellective appetite, the effect of the
final cause is greatly varied by the diversity of cognition. But the condition or application
of the cause along cannot suffice for such diversity. The antecedent is thought, for the
cognition of God through vision clear or obscure, intuitive or abstractive, causes, as many
wish, specific diversity in love, and, at a minimum, is in the cause so that one love is free
and another necessary. Again, the same apprehended good absolutely causes love so that

-- 2 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 3
absent and needing to be acquired it causes desire or intention. But as present it causes
joy. These acts are diverse in species. And sadness and fear are distinguished by the same
proportion according to evil apprehended as absent or present. Again, acts of virtue and
vice in the will are not distinguished by an object according to its real being but according
to its apprehended being. For from here it happens that if someone wishes to give alms
out of a wrong conscience, thinking that he is acting well, he does not perform an act of
vice but virtue, properly and according to the true species of real virtue. Finally, a similar
argument is that good does not move by the kind it is but by the kind that is apprehended.
And therefore we said with Aristotle that for causality of the end it does not report what
kind it is but what kind it is estimated (existimetur). Moreover, to be estimated is the same
as to be apprehended.
Et confirmatur haec ratio; nam in eodem appetitu intellectivo, effectus causae
finalis plurimum variatur ex diversitate cognitionis; sola autem conditio vel
applicatio causae non posset sufficere ad tantam diversitatem. Antecedens
patet, nam cognitio Dei per visionem claram vel obscuram, intuitivam aut
abstractivam, causat, ut multi volunt, diversitatem specificam in amore, et,
ut minimum, est in causa ut unus amor sit liber et alter necessarius. Rursus
idem bonum apprehensum absolute causat amorem, ut absens et acquiren-
dum causat desiderium vel intentionem; ut praesens vero causat gaudium,
qui actus specie diversi sunt; et eadem proportione distinguuntur circa malum
apprehensum ut absens vel praesens, tristitia et timor. Rursus actus virtutis et
vitii in voluntate non distinguuntur ex obiecto secundum eius esse reale, sed
secundum eius esse apprehensum; hinc enim fit ut, si quis ex conscientia er-
ronea velit eleemosynam facere putans se malefacere, ille non sit actus virtutis
sed vitii; et e converso, qui ex ignorantia invincibili vult furari ut eleemosy-
nam faciat, putans se bene facere, non facit actum vitii, sed virtutis, proprie
et secundum veram speciem realem virtutis. Denique simile argumentum est,
quod bonum non movet quale est, sed quale apprehenditur; et ideo supra
diximus cum Aristotele ad causalitatem finis non referre qualis sit, sed qualis
existimetur; esse autem existimatum idem est quod esse apprehensum.
4. The second principal reason for this view is that the former to be that which the final
cause per se and alone requires in order to cause is not only a condition but a formal
principle of causing. But to be existent is not a requisite for causing by the end. However,
to be cognized is per se necessary and that alone suffices. Therefore. The majow seems to
be known from its terms, because the formal principle of causing is nothing other than to
be that which per se first and formally is required in a cause so that it can cause. Hence
in the above [sections] we often said, and also will say below, that to be existent is not
a requisite condition with respect to the efficient cause but the same nature of causing,
because it is the entity itself of the thing and first to be that which is required for causing.
The minor, moreover, as long as the first part was satisfactorily proven in the above sec-
tion and that necessity of the apprehension is through itself from the strength of the final
cause, is clear from the manner of its causality, which is through metaphorical motion.

-- 3 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 4
for this proceeds through itself from objective being, not from the being of the thing in
itself. Indeed, as long as the other part is clear from what was said, for it was shown that
the end often causes before it exists. More correctly, even one which never will be or even
sometimes those which cannot even be, if nevertheless it is apprehended as possible.
Secunda ratio principalis pro hac sententia est quia illud esse quod per se ac
solum requirit finalis causa ut causet, non est tantum conditio, sed formale
principium causandi; sed esse existentiae non est requisitum in fine ad cau-
sandum; esse autem cognitum est per se necessarium et illud solum sufficit;
ergo. Maior videtur nota ex terminis, quia nihil aliud est esse formale prin-
cipium causandi quam esse id quod per se primo ac formaliter requiritur in
causa ut causare possit. Unde in superioribus saepe diximus, et inferius etiam
dicemus, esse existentiae respectu causae efficientis non esse conditionem req-
uisitam, sed ipsam rationem causandi, quia est ipsa entitas rei et primum esse
quod ad causandum requiritur. Minor autem quoad priorem partem satis pro-
bata est in superiori sectione, et, quod illa necessitas apprehensionis sit per se
ex vi causae finalis, constat ex modo causalitatis eius, qui est per metaphori-
cam motionem; haec enim per se procedit ex esse obiectivo, non ex esse rei
in se. Quoad alteram etiam partem constat ex dictis, nam ostensum est saepe
finem causare antequam sit; immo et illum qui nunquam futurus est, vel etiam
interdum qui nec esse potest, si tamen ut possibilis apprehendatur.
5. The latter contrary view.—The second view is that the end moves according to real being
and that being is the formal reason for moving and consequently cognition of the end
is only a condition or necessary approach for this kind of cause. This opinion is widely
taught by Cajetan [commenting on ST] IaIIæ.1.1, around ad 1, and he thinks that it is the
view of Averroes in Metaph. XII, com. 36, to the extent that he says that the health which
is in the thing causes finally, although just as it is in the soul it effects a desire for it. And
it can be taken from St. Thomas [ST] Ia.82.3, insofar as he says: ‘the will is inclined to the
thing itself just as it is in itself’; and from the Philosopher, who is cited here, in Metaph. VI,
text. 8, saying: ‘good and bad, which are the objects of the will, are in things’. Francesco
Silvestri holds the same opinion in [his commentary on] SCG I, c. 44, where he says that to
be in the mind is only a requisite condition for finalizing. Javellus also holds it in Metaph.
V, q. 6; and Ockham in [Sent.] II, q. 3, a. 2; and Biel in [Sent.] II, dist. 1, q. 1, a. 3; and it is
also taken from Scotus in [Sent.] I, dist. 1, q. 4.
Posterior sententia contraria.—Secunda sententia est finem movere secundum
esse reale illudque esse rationem formalem movendi, et consequenter cog-
nitionem finis esse tantum conditionem seu approximationem necessariam
huiusmodi causae. Hanc opinionem docuit late Caietanus, I-II, q. 1,. a. 1, circa
ad 1, existimatque esse sententiam Averrois, XII Metaph., com. 36, quatenus
ait sanitatem quae est in re causare finaliter, licet prout est in anima efficiat
desiderium sui. Et potest sumi ex D. Thoma, I, q. 82, a. 3, quatenus ait volun-
tatem inclinari ad ipsam rem prout in se est; et ex Philosopho, quem ibi citat, in VI

-- 4 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 5
Metaph., text. 8, dicentem bonum et malum, quae sunt obiecta voluntatis, esse in
rebus. Eamdem opinionem tenet Ferrariensis, I cont. Gent., c. 44, ubi dicit esse
in mente tantum esse conditionem requisitam ad finalisandum. Tenet etiam
Iavellus, V Metaph., q. 6; Ocham, In II, q. 3, a. 2; et Gabr., In II dist. 1, q. 1, a.
3; et sumitur etiam ex Scoto, In I, dist. 1, q. 4.
Judgement is brought between the stated views (Fertur inter praedictas sententias iudicium)
6. Between these views this latter one seems to me to be true, strictly speaking. And
the whole matter appears so clear that there can hardly be strength for dissenting except
some equivocation in the words themselves confounds matters. That will easily be clear,
if we distinguish those in which the authors of either opinion agree or those which are so
manifest that it is necessary to agree in them.
Inter has sententias haec posterior mihi videtur simpliciter vera; et res tota tam
clara apparet ut vix possit esse dissentiendi ratio, nisi in vocibus ipsis aliqua
aequivocatio misceatur. Quod patebit facile, si ea in quibus auctores utriusque
opinionis conveniunt, vel tam manifesta3 sunt ut in eis convenire necessario
debeant, distinxerimus.
7. The end does not need actual existence so that it causes.—And so first all agree that the end
does not need real existence or having been exercised (as they say) for causing finally, by
which sense it is clear that to be existent is not the nature of causing finally nor, indeed, a
necessary condition. I add, furthermore, that neither is being of a true essence or being of
possible existence really necessary for causing finally. For apprehension suffices. And by
this alone they for the greater part prove the reasons for the first opinion.
Finis ut causet non eget existentia actuali.—Primo itaque conveniunt omnes fi-
nem non indigere existentia reali, seu exercita (ut vocant) ad causandum fi-
naliter, quo sensu clarum est esse existentiae non esse rationem causandi fi-
naliter, immo nec conditionem necessariam. Addo etiam neque esse essentiae
verum aut esse existentiae possibile reipsa esse necessarium ad causandum
finaliter; nam apprehensum sufficit, et hoc tantum magna ex parte probant
rationes primae opinionis.
8. The will is not brought to pursuing the end in being cognized, but in being real. Second, it is
certain that the will does not tend to the end so that in it [i.e., the end] being cognized as
such it is pursued, but so that in proper real being, which is apprehended in it according
to its condition, the former is followed, and in this sense it is most certain that being in
cognition is not the reason for finalizing, but only a necessary condition. The former part
of the example and of the thing itself becomes evident in the saying. For anyone who
intends health or riches does not intend to cognize them or to think about them, but to
really pursue the thing according to true real existence, and likewise for other [ends].
3Changed from ‘manifiesta’.

-- 5 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 6
The reason, moreover, should be taken from the statements in sect. 5 that the nature of a
final cause’s formal causing is its goodness and agreeability. The thing, however, which
moves as end does not have its goodness and agreeability in being objective or cognized,
but in order to itself be real. For health is agreeable as belonging [to one], not as being
apprehended. Therefore, the formal nature of moving is its real being, insofar as it is
agreeable or good or the its real agreeability insofar as real being is founded in it and it
delivers [something] good and appetible.
It is confirmed because the end according to that being moves and according to that the
appetite of the agent is satisfied after it [i.e., the end] has been attained and without which
it would not be at rest. But then the end is compared to the will according to real being
and not according to apprehended being. Therefore. The major is clear, first, because that
is first in intention which is last in execution and second also because the end is that to
which the impetus of the agent tends. That to which it tends, moreover, is that by the
achievement of which it rests. The minor is also clear, because the soul is not at rest by the
apprehension of the end unless it is attained in reality by the soul. And apart from this
kind of attainment the intention of the agent is thought to be frustrated. And the authors
of the first opinion do not deny this, Medina4 finally admits in [his commentary on ST]
IaIIæ.1.1, although perhaps not entirely appropriately, as will be clear from what will be
said.
Voluntas non fertur ad assequendum finem in esse cognito, sed in esse reali.—Secun-
do certum est voluntatem non tendere in finem ut illum in esse cognito ut sic
assequatur, sed ut in proprio esse reali, quod in eo apprehendit iuxta eius con-
ditionem, illud assequatur, atque hoc sensu certissimum est esse in cognitione
non esse rationem finalisandi, sed solum conditionem necessarium. Prior pars
exemplis et ipsius rei declaratione fit evidens. Nam qui intendit sanitatem aut
divitias, non intendit illas cognoscere aut de illis cogitare, sed reipsa consequi
secundum veram existentiam realem, et idem de aliis. Ratio autem sumenda
est ex dictis sect. 5, quod ratio formalis causandi finalis causae est bonitas eius
et convenientia; res autem quae movet ut finis non habet suam bonitatem et
convenientiam in esse obiectivo seu cognito, sed in ordine ad suum esse reale;
sanitas enim est conveniens ut insit, non ut apprehendatur; ergo formalis ra-
tio movendi est reale esse eius, quatenus conveniens seu bonum, seu realis
convenientia eius, quatenus in ipso esse reali fundatur et illud reddit bonum
et appetibile. Confirmatur, quia finis secundum illud esse movet secundum
quod satiat appetitum agentis postquam illum est consecutus et sine quo non
quiescit; sed ita comparatur finis ad voluntatem secundum esse reale et non
secundum esse apprehensum; ergo. Maior constat, tum quia illud est primum
in intentione quod est ultimum in exsecutione; tum etiam quia finis est id in
quod tendit impetus agentis; in id autem tendit quo consecuto quiescit. Minor
etiam est clara, quia non quiescit animus apprehensione finis nisi illum in re
ipsa consequatur, et absque huiusmodi consecutione frustrari censetur inten-
4Which one? Su´arez cites more than one. But perhaps Bartholomew Medina is the likeliest one—
certainly, he wrote a commentary on the Prima Secundæ.

-- 6 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 7
tio agentis. Et hoc non negant auctores primae opinionis, ut tandem fatetur
Medina, I-II, q. 1, a. 1, quamquam fortasse non admodum consequenter, ut ex
dicendis constabit.
9. I said, moreover, that the will tends to the end according to real being along with its
condition, because sometimes it happens that the end itself of the acting will is nothing
other than the cognition of some object, as when we intend or desire to see God. For then
that being seen pertains to the formal nature of such a final cause. And it is similar when
a human desires as end solely the contemplation or speculation of some truth. And also
in this way the theologians say that sometimes a human can be delighted in a cognition
alone and not in the thing cognized, except according to being cognized, by which in this
case the act receives its goodness or badness.
But although the cognition itself is desired as end in these and similar examples, yet it
has its own proper real being according to which it is desired. And such a cognition then
is also not the nature of finalizing insofar as any prerequisite on the part of the end as it
moves the will but insofar as it is a certain action which in itself is judged agreeable and
as such is put forward to the will as sufficient for moving it or as the terminus to which
it tends. And so according to the appropriate division that is true for everyone the end
moves according to real being which by means of an apprehension is put before the will.
For according to that it is judged agreeable and, insofar as it is judged agreeable, it moves
[the will].
Dixi autem voluntatem tendere in finem secundum esse reale iuxta eius con-
ditionem, quia interdum contingit ipsum finem voluntatis operantis non esse
alium quam obiecti alicuius cognitionem, ut cum intendimus seu desidera-
mus videre Deum; tum enim illud esse visum pertinet ad rationem formalem
talis causae finalis; et simile est quando homo appetit ut finem solam con-
templationem vel speculationem alicuius veritatis. Et hoc etiam modo dicunt
theologi interdum hominem posse delectari in sola cognitione et non in re cog-
nita, nisi secundum esse cognitum, a quo tunc actus accipit suam bonitatem
vel malitiam. Quamquam vero in his et similibus exemplis cognitio ipsa ap-
petatur ut finis, tamen ipsa habet suum proprium esse reale, secundum quod
appetitur, et talis cognitio etiam tunc non est ratio finalisandi in quantum est
quid praerequisitum ex parte finis ut voluntatem moveat, sed in quantum est
actio quaedam quae per se iudicatur conveniens et ut sic proponitur voluntati
tamquam sufficiens ad movendum illam, seu tamquam terminus in quem ten-
dat. Atque ita secundum accommodatam distributionem verum in universum
est finem movere secundum esse reale, quod media apprehensione obiicitur
voluntati; nam secundum illud iudicatur conveniens, et quatenus conveniens
iudicatur, movet.
10. The cognition alone is a necessary condition for causing finally.—Third, it must be said
that the apprehension or its judgement of real agreeability properly and formally speak-
ing is not the nature of moving or finalizing, but is a necessary condition through the

-- 7 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 8
mode of necessary approach to such a genus of causality. As long as this more truly and
properly is said by the second view and is shown because to be in cognition is not the
goodness or agreeability according to which the end moves, as has been proven. There-
fore, the cognition itself is not the formal nature of the end itseld as it moves. Therefore,
it will be a necessary condition. The consequence is thought by a sufficient enumeration
of the parts.I.e., induction? Wherefore, just as with an efficient cause a local approach is a
requisite condition, so with the final cause a quasi-animal or -vital approach is a requisite
condition for such a mode of causing, because since the motion of this cause is metaphori-
cal, it ought to happen through a natural concordance of cognitive and appetitive powers,
as has often been said.
Cognitio tantum est conditio necessaria ad causandum finaliter.—Tertio dicendum
est apprehensionem seu iudicium illius convenientiae realis proprie ac for-
maliter loquendo non esse rationem movendi seu finalisandi, sed esse con-
ditionem necessariam per modum approximationis necessariae ad tale genus
causalitatis. Quoad hoc verius ac proprius loquitur secunda sententia, et pro-
batur quia esse in cognitione non est bonitas seu convenientia secundum quam
finis movet, ut probatum est; ergo nec cognitio ipsa est ratio formalis ipsi fini
ut moveat; erit ergo necessaria conditio. Patet consequentia a sufficienti par-
tium enumeratione. Quocirca, sicut in causa efficienti approximatio localis
est conditio requisita, ita in causa finali approximatio quasi animalis seu vi-
talis est requisita conditio ad talem causandi modum, quia cum motio huius
causae metaphorica sit, debet fieri per naturalem consensionem potentiarum
cognoscitivae et appetitivae, ut saepe dictum est.
11. To this it should be added, fourth, that this kind of cognition is such by its nature or
rather by mediating it that the nature or principle of formally finalizing can vary, not be-
cause it itself is the formal motive nature, but because it applies diverse formal natures of
moving. And in this the authors of the first view seem to have laboured in equivocation.
Moreover, it is declared from the stated similarity of the efficient cause. For although that
which applies the cause through itself acting is only the cause per accidens, nevertheless, if
the power is for applying diverse causes having diverse principles of acting, it will be able
by that part to vary the formal nature of acting and consequently to be the cause of diver-
sity in effect. Such therefore, because apprehensive strength is unvirsal, can be the cause
or occasion so that a nature of this kind is varied. And by a similar reason apprehensive
strength can apprehend the same material thing under diverse reasons, either truly or ap-
parently. And for that reason also come forth so that from a diversity of apprehension or
judgement the motion or causality of the end is changed, not because that variety comes
forth formally and through itself from the apprehension, but because it formally applies
a diverse end, as was said.
Hinc addendum est quarto hanc cognitionem talem esse ut ratione illius, vel
potius mediante illa, possit variari ratio seu principium formale finalisandi,
non quia ipsa sit ratio formalis motiva, sed quia applicat diversam rationem

-- 8 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 9
formalem movendi. Et in hoc videntur aequivocatione laborasse auctores pri-
mae sententiae. Declaratur autem ex praedicto simili causae efficientis; quam-
vis enim is qui applicat causam per se agentem solum sit causa per accidens,
tamen si potens sit ad applicandas diversas causas habentes diversa principia
agendi, poterit ex ea parte variare rationem formalem agendi, et consequenter
esse causa diversitatis in effectu. Sic igitur, quia vis apprehensiva universalis
est, potest applicare diversa obiecta et diversas rationes formales movendi; et
ideo, licet ipsa non sit ratio finalisandi, potest esse causa vel occasio ut huius-
modi ratio varietur. Et simili ratione potest vis apprehensiva eamdem mate-
rialem rem sub diversis rationibus apprehendere, aut vere aut apparenter; et
inde etiam provenit ut ex diversitate apprehensionis vel iudicii mutetur mo-
tio vel causalitas finis; non quia formaliter ac per se illa varietas proveniat ex
apprehensione, sed quia applicat finem formaliter diversum, ut declaratum
est.
The foundation of the first view is set free (Fundamenta prioris sententiae expediuntur)
12. And according to this last assertion all the testimony and reasons which the former
view brought forward are best revealed and set free. For whenever St. Thomas says
that a diversity of apprehensionm pertains to a diversity of object, ‘pertains’ should be
understood not formally but applicatively, if I may say it thus. Or it can be said in another
way (and it comes to the same) that diversity of apprehension, not that which it holds
on the part of the subject, but that which it holds on the part of the object, varies the
appetite and its object and the causality of the end. Moreover, I call the conditions of
apprehension on the part of the subject which is clear or obscure, certain or probably,
and similarly, which overflow to the application of the object under diverse reasons of
goodness or agreeability. However, when the diversity of apprehension concerns this, it
is also said to be diverse on the part of the object.
Et iuxta hanc ultimam assertionem declarantur optime et expediuntur testi-
monia omnia et rationes quas prior sententia afferebat. Quandocumque enim
D. Thomas ait diversitatem apprehensionis pertinere ad diversitatem obiecti,
intelligendum est pertinere non formaliter, sed applicative, ut sic dicam. Vel
aliter dici potest (et in idem redit) diversitatem apprehensionis, non quae se
tenet ex parte subiecti, sed quae se tenet ex parte obiecti, variare appetitum et
obiectum eius et causalitatem finis. Voco autem conditiones apprehensionis ex
parte subiecti quod sit clara vel obscura, certa aut probabilis, et similes, quae
non redundant in applicationem obiecti sub diversa ratione bonitatis vel con-
venientiae; quando autem diversitas apprehensionis ad hoc pertingit, dicitur
esse diversa etiam ex parte obiecti.
13. Hence, with regards to the first reason, the major should be distinguished. For what
on the part of the object is distinguished essentially from appetite, if through itself in
the first place it makes that, it will be the formal nature of the object. But if it makes
only that as applying to a diverse formal object, it will be able to be only a requisite

-- 9 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 10
condition. And in this way the apprehension concurs with this diversity. And intellective
and sensitive appetite must be understood to be distinguished according to the same
doctrine, because they follow the apprehension of sense of intellect. For if this distinction
should be reduced to the apprehended object, it consists in that that through the sense
it is applied to the object under a diverse reason of agreeability to sensitive and rational
nature. And althought sometimes the intellect can apprehend and propose the nature of
agreeability to the sensitive nature, nevertheless this is with respect to it as if materially.
For the adequate nature of it is more universal and in that itself it applies the formal
nature of such a good far differently than sense, and so that whole diversity, to the extent
that by the apprehension it overflows to the object, does not happen except as through
the condition having been applied.
And the same should be said about all the examples which are adduced for confirmation.
For vision and abstractive cognition, if perhaps they are in a cause, so that loves are di-
verse in species, is for this reason, namely, that the goodness of God through vision is
also applied very differently on its part, so that according to all its perfections formally
and distinctly cognized in one, most simple, perfect, and clear vision it moves the will
of the one seeing, when yet in abstractive cognition it only moves as cognized under the
determinate nature of some attribute or under some nature of some very blurred good.
And similarly if necessity, which is greater in one love than in another, comes from the
object, it is because they are apprehended through the vision and object and love of it as
here and now more necessary. Also such a good absent or present does not vary the act
on account on only the apprehensions, but because the thing itself and the condition in
the apprehended thing itself was started to cause a diverse motion in the appetite. And
the same reason applies to the remaining examples, as each person will easily be able to
understand by the application of each to the given doctrine.
Unde ad primam rationem distinguenda est maior; nam quod ex parte obiecti
distinguit essentialiter appetitus, si id per se primo faciat, erit ratio formalis
obiecti; si vero solum id faciat ut applicans diversum obiectum formale, esse
poterit tantum conditio requisita; atque hoc modo concurrit apprehensio ad
hanc diversitatem. Et iuxta eamdem doctrinam intelligendum est appetitum
intellectivum et sensitivum distingui, quia consequuntur apprehensionem sen-
sus vel intellectus; nam si haec distinctio reducenda est ad obiectum apprehen-
sum, in eo consistit quod per sensum applicatur obiectum sub diversa ratione
convenientiae ad naturam sensitivam vel rationalem. Et quamvis interdum
intellectus possit apprehendere et proponere rationem convenientiae ad natu-
ram sensitivam, tamen hoc est respectu illius quasi materiale; nam adaequata
ratio eius universalior est, et in eo ipso longe aliter applicat rationem formalem
talis boni quam sensus, et ita tota illa diversitas, quatenus ex apprehensione in
obiectum redundat, non fit nisi ut per conditionem applicantem. Atque idem
dicendum est ad omnia exempla quae in confirmationem adducuntur; nam
visio et abstractiva cognitio, si fortasse in causa sunt, ut amores sint diversi
in specie, ideo est quia bonitas Dei per visionem longe aliter applicatur etiam
ex parte eius, ita ut secundum omnes perfectiones suas formaliter ac distincte

-- 10 of 11 --

Su´arez, DM XXIII, sect. 8 11
cognitas in una simplicissima perfectione clare visa moveat voluntatem viden-
tis, cum tamen in cognitione abstractiva solum moveat ut cognita sub deter-
minata ratione alicuius attributi vel sub aliqua ratione boni valde confusi. Et
similiter si necessitas, quae est maior in uno amore quam in alio, provenit ex
obiecto, ideo est quia per visionem et obiectum et amor eius apprehendun-
tur ut hic et nunc magis necessaria. Sic etiam bonum absens vel praesens non
variant actus propter solas apprehensiones, sed quia ipsa res et conditio in ipsa
apprehensa nata est diversum motum causare in appetitu; eademque ratio est
de caeteris exemplis, ut facile unusquisque intelligere poterit applicando sin-
gula ad doctrinam traditam.
14. To the second argument is responded that there can be equivocation in either of the as-
sumed premisses. For when in the major is said that the former being of the cause which
by itself and alone is required for causing is the formal nature of causing, it it is under-
stood concerning being of existence having been exercised, it is false in the final cause,
because, as was frequently said, it does not always require this being for causing. But it it
is understood concerning the being of existence, strictly speaking, namely, by abstracting
from that which is then when it causes or that will be in the future or is estimated, then it
is true that some being of this sort is in the cause the nature of causing. But in this sense
the minor is false, because, although the end when it first moves in reality itself often does
not have this existence except in apprehension, just as it is said to be first in intention, yet
it is put before and is represented in that apprehension according to some real being on
account of which the will is moved.
Ad secundam rationem respondetur, in utraque praemissa sumpta posse esse
aequivocationem. Cum enim in maiori dicitur illud esse causae quod per se
ac solum requiritur ad causandum esse rationem formalem causandi, si intel-
ligatur de esse existentiae exercito, falsum est in causa finali, quia, ut saepe
dictum est, non semper requirit hoc esse ad causandum. Si vero intelligatur
de esse existentiae absolute, scilicet abstrahendo ab eo quod tunc sit quando
causat, vel quod futurum sit, aut existimetur, sic verum est rationem causandi
esse in causa aliquod huiusmodi esse. In hoc vero sensu falsa est minor, quia,
licet finis cum primo movet in re ipsa saepe non habeat hanc existentiam nisi
in apprehensione, quomodo dicitur esse primum in intentione, tamen in illa
apprehensione obiicitur et repraesentatur secundum aliud esse reale, propter
quod voluntas movetur.

-- 11 of 11 --
