Last revision: December 3, 2025	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DM XXIII, SECT. 101
© Sydney Penner 2010
<885, col. b>2
Utrum in actionibus naturalium et irrationalium agen- Whether true final causality intercedes in the actions of nat-
tium vera causalitas finalis intercedat. ural and irrational agents.
1. Haec quaestio generalis est de omnibus agentibus This general question concerns all agents lacking intellect
carentibus intellectu et voluntate: quibus omnibus and will, in all of which it is generally the case that they
5 commune est ut non possint actiones suas vel me- 5R cannot refer or order their actions or means to the end.
dia ad finem referre seu ordinare. Et hinc oritur And from this arises the reason for doubting, for the proper A reason for
doubting.	dubitandi ratio: nam propria causalitas finis non est causality of an end does not exist without this ordering as
Ratio
dubitandi.
sine hac ordinatione, ut satis declarant illae partic- is sufficiently shown by those phrases by which the causal-
ulae cuius gratia, et propter quod aliquid fit, quibus ity of an end is usually indicated: ‘for the sake of which’
10 causalitas finis solet declarari: et ideo difficile est 10R (cuius gratia) and ‘for the sake of which something happens’
invenire aut declarare causalita- <886> tem finalem (propter quod aliquid fit). But to the contrary is the fact that
in actionibus horum agentium, et in effectibus eo- even these agents act for the sake of an end, as Aristotle Aristotle.
rum prout ab ipsis provenit. In contrarium vero proves at length in Phys. II, c. 7. Action for the sake of an
est, quia haec etiam agentia agunt propter finem, ut end, however, cannot be understood without causality of
15 late probat Aristoteles in 2. Physicorum cap. 7. non 15R an end. And there is a special difficulty concerning brute
potest autem intelligi operatio propter finem sine animals, for they truly are moved to loving as a result of
causalitate finis. Et de brutis est specialis difficul- some cognition of good. Therefore, the metaphorical motion
Aristoteles. tas, nam illa vere moventur ad amandum ex aliqua of cognized good intervenes in that affect and action. There-
cognitione boni: ergo intercedit in eo affectu et opere fore, that belongs to true final causality. And experience
20 motio metaphorica boni cogniti: ergo illa pertinet ad 20R confirms this for we see that a swallow gathers chaff or
veram causalitatem finalem. Atque hoc confirmat ex- effects something similar in such a way as to procure its
perientia, nam videmus hirundinem ita congregare end and likewise with other things.
paleas vel aliquid simile efficere, sicut expedit ad
finem suum, et sic de aliis.
25 Vetus opinio de agentibus naturalibus. The ancient opinion concerning natural agents.
1Latin text by and large follows the 1597 edition, with most abbreviations expanded and spellings modernized. Punctuation kept as is. I checked the
text against the Vivès edition for significant variations. For recorded variants, A = 1597 edition and V = Vivès edition. Note that the Vivès edition does
not have marginal notes; many, though not all, of the marginal notes from the 1597 edition are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text at the
head of paragraphs.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 2
2. In hac re fuit antiqua opinio veterum Philosopho- 2. In this matter, there was an ancient opinion of the old
rum negantium opera naturae provenire ex inten- philosophers who denied that the works of nature result
tione alicuius finis, sed casu ita constitisse, vel ex from the intention of some end but [maintained] that they
concursu atomorum temere ita concurrentium, vel came about by chance either from the concurrence of atoms
5 ex necessitate materiae, ut citato loco 2. Physicorum 5R blindly coming together in such and such a way or from the
cap. 7. et 8. contra Anaxagoram, Empedoclem, Dem- necessity of matter, as Aristotle argues against Anaxagoras, Aristotle.
Aristoteles. ocritum, et Epicurum disputat Aristoteles. Quae Empedocles, Democritus, and Epicurus in the cited place
sententia adeo est absurda, ut refutatione non egeat. in Phys. II, c. 7 and 8. This view is so absurd that there is
Oportet tamen advertere aliud esse agere de con- no need for a refutation.
10 stitutione totius universi, et de actione universalis 10R Nevertheless, one must note that it is one thing to deal
naturae ad ipsum componendum, et ita regendum ut with the setting up of the whole universe and with the
conservari possit: aliud vero de actionibus propriis action of universal nature composing it and ruling it so
singulorum agentium naturalium. Prior actio seu ef- that it can be conserved but another thing [to deal] with
fectio revera non est actio alicuius agentis naturalis the proper actions of individual natural agents. The former
15 intellectu carentis, sed est actio supremi auctoris 15R action or effecting is not really the action of some natural
naturae, qui sua sapientia totam universi naturam agent lacking intellect but is the action of the supreme
condidit ac moderatur: et ideo actio illa ad praesen- author of nature who puts together the whole nature of
tem quaestionem non spectat, nec de illa dubitari the universe and guides it by his wisdom. And therefore
potest, quin propter finem ab auctore suo intentum, that action is not relevant for the present question, nor can
20 atque adeo ex causalitate finis profecta sit, iuxta 20R there be any doubt that it was made for the sake of the end
doctrinam praecedentis sectionis. Atque hoc evi- intended by its author and for that reason was made by
dentissime docet ipsa universi pulchritudo, et mira the causality of the end, according to the doctrine of the
partium eius, et causarum omnium consensio et or- preceding section. And the very beauty of the universe and
dinatio. Ex qua non solum sancti Patres, sed etiam the marvelous harmony and ordering of its parts and causes
25 sapientiores Philosophi unum esse huius universi 25R teaches this most clearly. By this not only the holy Fathers
auctorem, et gubernatorem, qui in finem a se inten- but also the wiser philosophers understood that there is
tum omnia constituit et ordinavit, intellexerunt, ut one author and governor of this universe who sets up and
latius infra tractabimus demonstrando Deum esse, orders all things according to the end intended by himself.
Conimbricenses. et multa de hac re erudite et breviter indicarunt We will discuss this more thoroughly below in demonstrating
30 Conimbricenses, lib. 2. Physicorum cap. 9, q. 1. 30R that God exists, and the Coimbra [commentators] pointed The Coimbra
commentators.	out many things concerning this matter with brevity and
erudition in Phys. II, c. 9, q. 1.
3. Solum ergo hic inquirimus de actionibus nat- 3. Therefore, we inquire here only concerning the ac-
uralium causarum, sive illae sint om- <col. b> nino tions of natural causes that are either entirely particular like
particulares, ut ignis, plantae, etc., sive aliquo modo 35R fire, plants, and so on or that are in some way universal like
universales, ut caeli. De quibus praeterea certum the heavens. In addition, it is clear and certain concerning
35 et clarum est, non casu aut contingenter certas ac- these that certain actions are done not by chance or contin-
tiones operari, sed unumquodque agens naturale ex gently but that each natural agent has by the propensity of

-- 2 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 3
propensione propriae naturae habere definitam oper- its proper nature a definite action and way of acting and a
ationem, et operandi modum, ac certum terminum, 40R fixed terminus to which it tends through its action. This is
in quem per suam operationem tendit. Quod etiam also evident from experience, for a stone is always brought
40 est evidens experientia, nam lapis sua motu natu- downwards by its natural motion, fire always heats, from
rali semper fertur deorsum, ignis semper calefacit; different seeds different living things are begotten, and some
ex diversis seminibus diversa viventia procreantur, powers and organs are fixed for this function but others for
et aliae potentiae et organa ad hoc munus, aliae 45R another function. And individual things have in proportion
vero ad alia destinatae sunt, et eam formam, situm, that form, position, and all the remaining things necessary
45 et reliqua omnia ad operandum necessaria in ea for acting which are necessary for such actions or effects.
proportione habent res singulae, quae ad tales ac- This may be seen in all natural things but especially in living
tiones vel effectus necessaria sunt. Quod in omnibus things and in animals.
rebus naturalibus, et praesertim in viventibus, et 50R And this was necessary for the agreeable composition
animalibus videre licet. Fuitque hoc necessarium ad and governance of the universe itself, for it is composed of
50 convenientem ipsius universi compositionem et gu- various things and contraries which exercise various and
bernationem, nam cum ex variis rebus et contrariis sometimes even contrary actions. If they were not all set up
constet, quae varias etiam, et interdum contrarias in such a way that each individual attended to its functions
actiones exercent, si non essent omnia ita consti- 55R in an orderly way, there would be the greatest confusion
tuta, ut singula ordinate sua munera obirent, in in the universe itself and the things themselves could not
55 ipso universo summa confusio esset, et res ipsae be conserved at all. But so that this kind of harmony and See
Lactantius, De
Opificio Dei,
and
St. Thomas,
SCG III, from
c. 2.
Vide
Lactantium,
lib. De opificio
Dei, et
D. Thomam 3.
Summae
contra Gentiles
a cap. 2.
minime conservari possent. Ut autem huiusmodi order can arise from so many things, it was necessary that
concentus et ordo ex tot rebus consurgere posset, individual things tend to definite ends or termini by their
necessarium fuit res singulas in destinatos fines seu 60R actions. From this the good of the whole universe arises.
terminos suis actionibus tendere, ex quibus totius Also, we see by this reasoning that natural motions are
60 universi bonum consurgeret. Item, hac ratione vide- carried out regularly in the same way and that they only
mus naturales motus regulariter eodem modo perfici, rarely fail (and this not apart from the occurrence of some
raroque deficere, idque non absque aliquo extrinseco extrinsic impediment). Likewise, natural things manage
impedimento occurrente. Item, in suis operibus ita 65R themselves in their action in such a way as is expedient for
se gerunt res naturales sicut expedit ut ad connatu- them to arrive at their connatural terminus, which terminus
65 ralem terminum perveniant, quo termino consecuto having been achieved they cease from acting. Therefore, all
cessant ab operando. Haec ergo omnia sunt mani- these things are manifest signs that these natural agents
festa signa, haec agentia naturalia operari non casu act not by chance and blindly, but by tending in a defined
ac temere, sed definito modo tendendo in certum 70R way to some fixed target.
aliquem scopum.
70	Reiecto errore
in quo sita
difficultas.
4. Iam vero solum superest quaestio (quae ex 4. But now there remains only the question (which it I reject the
error in which
the difficulty is
located.
parte videtur pertinere posse ad loquendi modum) seems might in part only pertain to a manner of speaking)
an ratione huius determinationis dicenda sint haec whether by reason of these determinations these agents
agentia agere propter finem, et (quod ad nos magis should be said to act for the sake of the end and (what is
55 confusio esset ] esset confusio V.

-- 3 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 4
spectat) an eorum actiones dici possint proprie 75R more relevant to us) whether their actions can properly be
75 causatae a finali causa. Aliqui enim simpliciter ne- said to have been caused by a final cause. For some simply
gant utrumque loquendi modum, quia ipsa agen- deny either way of speaking because the agents themselves
tia non moventur a fine, in quo proprie causalitas are not moved by an end, which is what the causality of
<887> finis consistit. Item finis respectu harum the end properly consists of. Also, the end does not stand
actionum non se habet ut principium, sed tantum 80R as a principle with respect to these actions, but only as a
80 ut terminus: locus enim deorsum respectu lapidis terminus. For the place below with respect to a stone is not
non est principium motus quo descendit, sed tan- the principle of motion by which it descends but only its
tum terminus: finis autem, ut saepe diximus, ut terminus. The end, however, as we have often said, is not
habet solum rationem termini non est causa, sed a cause insofar as it has only the nature of a terminus, but
ut aliquo modo est principium. Alii vero simpliciter 85R [only insofar] as it is a principle in some way. But others
85 putant admittendas esse illas locutiones, quia Aris- simply think that these locutions should be granted, since
toteles absolute ait agentia naturalia operari propter Aristotle unreservedly says that natural agents act for the
finem, et formam dicit esse finem naturalis gener- sake of an end and says that form is the end of natural
ationis, et significat esse proprie causam finalem. generation and indicates that it is properly a final cause.
Item quia natura summo artificio, et industria has 90R Also, because nature seems to exercise these actions with
90 suas operationes exercere videtur, per media valde the utmost skill and industry through means that are very
proportionata fini. proportionate to the end.
Resolutio de causalitate finis in agentibus mere nat- The resolution concerning the causality of the end in merely
uralibus. natural agents.
5. Nihilominus proprius modus loquendi in hac ma- 5. Nevertheless, the more proper way of speaking in this
teria est, actiones horum agentium naturalium esse matter is that the actions of these natural agents are for
propter finem, et esse effecta causae finalis. Non the sake of an end and are effects of a final cause, yet not
tamen ut praecise egrediuntur ab ipsis naturalibus precisely as coming out of the natural agents themselves
5 agentibus, sed ut simul sunt a primo agente, quod 5R but as being at the same time from the first agent who acts
in omnibus et per omnia operatur. Vel e converso in all things and through all things.3 Or, conversely (and
(et fere in idem redit) prout ipsa proxima agentia perhaps it amounts to the same thing), as the proximate
substant directioni et intentioni superioris agentis. agents themselves stand under the direction and intention
Et ideo ipsa agentia naturalia non tam dicuntur of a superior agent. And for that reason natural agents
10 operari propter finem, quam dirigi in finem a supe- 10R themselves are not so much said to act for the sake of an
riori agente. Ita explicarunt rem hanc sapientiores end as to be directed to an end by a superior agent. This
D. Thomas.
Simplicius.
Theologi et Philosophi, D. Thomas 1 p. q. 103. art. is the way in which the wiser theologians and philosophers
1. et 3. Summae contra Gentiles cap. [24]. ubi uti- explain this matter. St. Thomas [explains it in this way] St. Thomas.
tur communi exemplo de sagitta, quae in certum in I, q. 103, art. 1, and SCG III, c. 24, where he uses the
3Cf. DM 24.2.14.
13 24 ] 25 A V.

-- 4 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 5
15 scopum tendit, non tamen in illum se dirigit, sed a 15R example of an arrow which tends to a fixed target yet does
iaculante dirigitur. Idem Albertus in 2. Physicorum not direct itself to it but is directed by the shooter. Likewise,
cap. 2. et ibi alii Philosophi, et Simplicius text. 78. Albertus [Magnus] in Phys. II, c. 2, and other philosophers
sumiturque ex Aristotele ibi, et 1. De caelo cap. 4. in the same place and Simplicius in text. 78. And it is taken Simplicius.
text. 32. ubi dum coniungit Deum et naturam, di- from Aristotle here and in De caelo I, c. 4, text. 32, where,
20 cens, nihil facere frustra, satis indicat naturam in 20R provided that he conjoins God and nature, he indicates
agendo propter finem subordinari Deo. Et eodem sufficiently that nature in acting for the sake of an end is
modo lib. 2. De partibus animalium cap. 13. ait, nat- subordinated to God when he says that nothing is done
uram nihil agere frustra, et ibidem ait naturam velle in vain. And in the same way he says in De part. an. II,
hoc vel illud propter finem: quod non potest intelligi c. 13, that nature does nothing in vain. And in that very
25 de natura, nisi propter auctorem suum. Et eodem 25R place he says that nature wills this or that for the sake of
sensu ait 4. De generatione animalium cap. 2. Om- an end, which cannot be understood of nature unless on
nia, quae natura, vel arte fiunt, ratione aliqua sunt. account of its author. And in the same sense he says in De
Et hinc etiam manavit illud tritum axioma, Opus gen. an. IV, c. 2: ‘All things which are done by nature or
naturae esse opus intelligentiae, ut est apud Aver- art are for some reason.’ And from here flows that familiar
30	Averroes.
Themistius.
Hippocrates.
Galenus.
roem 12. Metaphysicae comm. 18. et Themistium 1. 30R axiom ‘the work of nature is the work of intelligence’ as it
Physicae text. 81. et 1. De anima text. 23. Denique is in Averroes, Metaph. XII, com. 18, and in Themistius, Averroes.
Themistius.
Hippocrates.
Galen.
ideo Hippocrates, quem <col. b> imitatur Galenus Phys. I, text. 81, and De anim. I, text. 23. Finally, for this
lib. 1. De usu part. naturalia agentia, docta et in- reason Hippocrates in De usu part. I, whom Galen imitates,
docta vocat, indocta in se, docta in directione primae calls natural agents trained and untrained, untrained in
35 causae. 35R themselves, [but] trained in the direction of the first cause.
6. Atque ita fit ut in his actionibus, ut sunt a 6. And thus it happens that there is no proper final
naturalibus agentibus, non sit propria causalitas causality in these actions insofar as they are from natural
finalis, sed solum habitudo ad certum terminum: ut agents but only a disposition to a fixed terminus. But insofar
vero sunt a Deo, ita sit in illis causalitas finalis, si- as they are from God, there is final causality in them just
40 cut in aliis externis et transeuntibus actionibus Dei. 40R as in God’s other external and transeunt actions. For the
Adaequatum enim principium harum actionum non adequate principle of these actions is not only the proximate
est solum proximum agens naturale, nisi forte se- natural agent, except perhaps with qualification, namely,
cundum quid, scilicet in tali ordine; tamen absolute in such and such an order. Still, without qualification
praecipuum est prima causa: ideoque in adaequato there is in particular the first cause. And therefore an
45 principio talium actionum includitur intellectualis 45R intellectual cause intending their end is included in the
causa intendens finem earum. adequate principle of such actions.
Cur res
naturales
diversis dispo-
sitionibus
affectae.
7. Unde ulterius recte concludit Aristoteles, pri- 7. Hence, Aristotle rightly concludes further that the Why natural
things are
affected by
different
dispositions.
mam radicem ob quam res naturales habent has first root on account of which natural things have these dis-
dispositiones, vel haec organa, aut has partes, et positions or these organs or these parts and similar things
50 similia, non esse sumendam ex sola materia, sed ex 50R should not be taken from matter alone but from an end. For
fine. Nam si materia sumatur secundum se, indiffer- if matter is taken according to itself, it is indifferent and has
ens est, et nullam habet necessitatem harum disposi- no necessity for these dispositions or properties. But if it is

-- 5 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 6
tionum seu proprietatum: si vero supponatur ut iam supposed as already affected by these or those disposition,
affecta his vel illis dispositionibus, iam illae intro- then these having been introduced are for the sake of some
55 ductae sunt propter aliquem finem seu formam, et 55R end or form and the form itself requires these for the sake
ipsa forma indiget illis propter suam conservationem, of its conservation or for the sake of some action. But the
vel propter aliquam operationem: ipsa vero operatio action itself is in turn either for the sake of the conservation
rursus est vel propter conservationem speciei aut of the species or of the individual itself or at least for the
ipsiusmet individui, aut saltem propter communica- sake of the communication of its perfections. For there
60 tionem suae perfectiones; in his enim naturalibus 60R are no actions which themselves are ends in these natural
agentibus non sunt operationes, quae ipsaemet sint agents, for that is proper to intellectual things. And thus ev-
fines; hoc enim proprium est intellectualium rerum. ery connection and connatural necessity which is per se in
Atque ita omnis connexio et necessitas connaturalis, these natural things is taken from the order to an end. Nor
quae per se est in his rebus naturalibus, sumitur is it an objection that natural properties necessarily agree
65 ex ordine ad finem. Neque obstat quod naturales 65R on account of the intrinsic dimanation of the form, since
proprietates necessario conveniant propter intrin- one disposition is not repugnant to another but they have
secam dimanationem a forma, quia una habitudo a mutual subordination. For that necessary dimanation is
non repugnat alteri, sed habent inter se subordina- reduced to the efficient cause which is subordinate to the
tionem, nam illa necessaria dimanatio reducitur ad final [cause]. For nature gave the power of such a form in
70 efficientem causam, quae subordinata est finali: ideo 70R order that such properties would dimanate from it, because
enim natura dedit tali formae vim ut ab ea dimanar- these are appropriate to the end for the sake of which the
ent tales proprietates, quia illae sunt accommodatae thing exists which is constituted through such a form. Thus
ad finem propter quem est res quae per talem for- for this reason the concursus of a final cause is found in the
mam constituitur. Sic igitur tam in constitutione et constitution and formation of these things as in the action
75 formatione harum rerum, quam in earum actione 75R of them. But the proper intention of such an end is not in
reperitur concursus finalis causae: intentio autem the natural agents themselves but in the first cause.
propria talis finis non est in ipsis naturalibus agen-
tibus, sed in prima causa.
Quae
necessitas
asserendi
connexionem
rerum
naturalium et
directionem in
finem.
Aristoteles.
8. <888>Sed videri potest alicui sine causa 8. But it can seem to someone that this mode of acting This necessity
in asserting a
connection
between
natural things
and a
direction to
the end.
80 confictus hic modus agendi propter finem, esseque for the sake of the end was fabricated without cause and is
praeter Aristotelis intentionem. Nam imprimis Aris- contrary to the intention of Aristotle. For, in the first place,
toteles in 12. Metaphysicae videtur sentire Deum 80R Aristotle in Metaph. XII seems to think that God does not rec-
haec inferiora non agnoscere, nedum curare illa: ognize these lower things, much less care about them. And
et in lib. De mundo ad Alexandrum significat, non in Lib. de mundo ad Alex. he indicates that those who think
85 recte sentire de Deo qui putant Deum in curandis God is occupied in cares about these lower actions do not
his inferioribus actionibus occupari. Deinde si per think rightly concerning God. Next, if, per impossibile, God
impossibile Deus non concurreret ad actiones agen- 85R were not to concur with the actions of natural agents but
tium naturalium, sed eas independenter suos motus were to permit them to conduct their motions independently,
agere sineret, nihilominus lapis descenderet deor- a stone would still descend downwards, fire would still beget
90 sum, ignis generaret sibi simile, et sic de caeteris: what is similar to itself, and so on for the remaining things.

-- 6 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 7
non est ergo haec finalis causalitas, sed mera nat- Therefore, there is none of this final causality but mere natu-
uralis necessitas. Et confirmatur, nam si agentia 90R ral necessity. And it is confirmed: for if natural agents acted
naturalia agerent ex intentione divina, nunquam according to divine intention, they would never err in their
errarent in suis actionibus, nec deficerent a con- actions nor fail to reach their termini. [But] the consequence
95 sequendis terminis earum: consequens est contra is contrary to experience, since monsters—which are called
experientiam, cum saepe generentur monstra, quae sins of nature—are often generated. That the consequence
peccata naturae appellantur. Sequela patet, quia 95R would follow is clear, because divine intention cannot be
divina intentio nec frustrari potest, nec errare. frustrated and cannot err.
9. Respondetur, de Aristotelis mente iam satis 9. It is responded: concerning the mind of Aristotle it
100 ex dictis constat, latiusque infra ostendemus ex eius is already clear enough from what was said. And we will
sententia, habere Deum scientiam et providentiam show more thoroughly below that according to his view God
harum rerum singularium et inferiorum: quod non 100R has knowledge and providence of these singular and lower
obscure indicat infra lib. 12. in fine, dum totum uni- things. He indicates this not obscurely later in book XII
versum subiicit Deo tamquam supremo principi et at the end provided that the whole universe is subject to
105 duci. Ad primam vero rationem respondetur primo, God as to a supreme prince and guide. But to the first
ex illa hypothesi impossibili sequi, naturam ordi- argument it is responded, first, that from that impossible
natissime operari tendendo in finem, sine ulla direc- 105R hypothesis it follows that nature acts most ordinately by
tione vel intentione finis, quod per se est satis absur- tending to an end without any direction or intention of an
dum. Etenim eodem modo posset quis argumentari, end. This is absurd enough in itself.4 And indeed in the
110 quod licet hic mundus non esset ab alio conditus, si same way someone could argue that, even if this world were
ex se ita esset sicut nunc est, habere convenientissi- not created by another, if out of itself it would be then just as
mum ordinem sine causalitate finis. Hoc tamen non 110R it is now, it has a most agreeable order without the causality
obstat quominus de facto, sicut non potest esse nisi of an end. Nevertheless, this is no objection to the fact that
causatus, ita non potest esse nisi causatus a fine. just as it cannot be except if it was caused, so it cannot be
115 Ita ergo dicimus, motus et actiones rerum natural- except if it was caused by an end. So therefore we say that
ium, sicut non possunt esse sine concursu alicuius the motions and actions of natural things cannot be without
intellectualis agentis, ita non posse esse sine causali- 115R the causality of an end just as they cannot be without the
tate finis. Addo deinde, quod si per impossibile Deus concursus of some intellectual agent. I add, next, that if, per
per se et immediate non concurreret ad omnes ac- impossibile, God were not to concur per se and immediately
120 tiones agentium naturalium, nihilominus mediate with all the actions of natural agents, they ought still to be
dici deberent ordinatae in finem ab auctore natu- called mediately ordered to an end by the author of nature
rae, qui et naturalibus agentibus dedit tales virtutes 120R who also gives to natural agents such strength for the sake
propter tales actiones, et ipsas actiones esse voluit of such actions and who wills such actions to be for the sake
propter certos fines, et generatim propter bonum et of fixed ends and for the sake of the good and conservation
125 conservationem universi.<col./ b> of the universe generally.
Multi in
natura
effectus
quorum nulla
reddi potest
sufficiens
causa, praeter
finem
intentum a
prima causa.
10. Unde tandem addo, plures esse motus, 10. Whence, finally, I add that there are many motions The many
effects in
nature of
which no
sufficient
cause can be
given beyond
the end
intended by
the first cause.
vel actiones in his rebus naturalibus, quarum non 125R or actions in these natural things for which no sufficient
4Cf. DM 29.3.29.

-- 7 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 8
potest sufficiens ratio reddi ex privatis proprietat- reason can be given from the private properties or inclina-
ibus vel inclinationibus singularum rerum: aqua tions of the individual things. For water ascends up again to
130 enim sursum ascendit ad replendum vacuum, cuius fill the vacuum, the reason for which cannot be given from
ratio ex peculiari aquae natura ac proprio impetu the specific nature of water and its proper impetus. But [it
reddi non potest, sed ex fine, qui in perfectione totius 130R can be given] according to the end which is placed in the
universi sit positus, quem oportet ab alio superiori perfection of the whole universe, which must be intended
agente intendi. Simile est de aqua maris, quae ita in by another superior agent. It is similar with the water of the
135 littore continet impetum, et tumentes fluctus suos, sea which contains the water’s driving force and swelling
ut terram nunquam cooperiat; utique propter mix- waves at the shoreline in such a way that it never covers up
torum et viventium salutem, quem finem intendit 135R the earth. This is certainly for the sake of the well-being of
supremus naturae gubernator. Ex his ergo intel- mixed and living things, which end the supreme governor
ligimus, quando hae res naturales moventur vel op- of nature intends. From these things, therefore, we un-
140 erantur iuxta proprias et peculiares inclinationes derstand that when these natural things are moved or act
suas, cum per illas etiam deserviant commodis et according to their proper and special inclinations, in them
conservationi totius universi, et suarum specierum, 140R they also act according to the direction of an end through
vel etiam individuorum, et praecipue hominis, in eis subordination to a superior agent, since through those they
etiam operari ex directione in finem, per subordina- also serve the advantages and the conservation of the whole
145 tionem ad superius agens. universe and its species, and even of individuals, especially
of humans.
Lege
Aristotelem lib.
2. Physicae
cap. 8. et 2. De
anima cap. 4.
et 1. Politicae
cap. 5.
Aristoteles.
11. Ad confirmationem respondetur simpliciter 145R 11. To the confirmation is responded by simply denying Read Aristotle,
Phys. II, c. 8,
and DA II, c. 4,
and Polit. I,
c. 5. Aristotle.
negando sequelam: quin potius Aristoteles 2. Physi- the consequence. Rather, Aristotle confirms in Phys. II,
cae text. 82. inde confirmat haec agentia naturalia text. 82, that these natural agents act for the sake of an end,
agere propter finem, quia sicut ars intendens finem, because just as an art intending an end sometimes does not
150 interdum illum non assequitur, ita in actionibus nat- achieve its end, so also in the actions of nature in the case
urae, eo quod certum finem intendant, inde sequi 150R where they intend a certain end, monsters or sins of nature
monstra seu peccata naturae, quia non semper pos- follow thereupon because as a result of an impediment that
sunt finem suum assequi propter impedimentum occurs they cannot always achieve their end. Otherwise,
occurrens. Alioqui, si natura non tenderet in cer- if nature did not tend to a fixed end, there would be no
155 tum finem, nulla essent monstra in natura, quia monsters in nature because it would no more deviate from
non magis aberraret ab scopo, efficiendo monstrum, 155R the target when effecting a monster than when effecting
quam efficiendo quodlibet aliud: nam monstrum pro- anything else. For a monster properly is a vice of nature
prie est vitium naturae a fine suo deficientis. Quod falling short from its end. But what was objected concerning
vero obiiciebatur de intentione auctoris naturae, nil the intention of the author of nature is no objection at all
160 obstat, quia illa intentio non semper est absoluta because that intention is not always absolute and efficacious
et efficax, seu (ut Theologorum more loquamur) per 160R or, to speak in the manner of theologians, not through the
voluntatem beneplaciti, vel consequentem, sed per consequent will or the will of good pleasure but through the
voluntatem generalem, vel antecedentem: quae est general or antecedent will, which is, as it were, a conditioned
quasi conditionata intentio, quae in hoc consistit, intention that consists in this: that God will a perfect effect

-- 8 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 9
165 quod Deus vult effectum perfectum sequi, quantum to follow insofar as it can follow according to the order of
iuxta ordinem naturalium causarum sequi potuerit, 165R natural causes since he wills to concur with these insofar
cum quibus quantum in ipso est, vult concurrere. as he is concerned. But at the same time he either permits
Simul autem vel permittit, vel etiam interdum vult, or sometimes even wills and intends monsters or sins of
et intendit monstra vel pec- <889> cata naturae, vel nature, either for the sake of the beauty and variety of the
170 propter universi pulchritudinem et varietatem, vel ut universe or in order to permit natural causes to conduct
causas naturales suos motus et cursus agere sinat. 170R their motions and courses. And for this reason he neither
Et ideo neque cum causa impedita ab alia extraordi- wills to concur with an impeded cause in some extraordinary
nario modo vult concurrere, neque etiam impedien- way nor even to remove the impeding cause by special care
tem causam peculiari cura aut providentia removere, or providence, regularly speaking, although he sometimes
175 regulariter loquendo, quamvis ob commune bonum effects it on account of the common good, concerning which
interdum id efficiat, de quo latius Theologi partim 175R the theologians [speak] more thoroughly in I, dist. 45, and
D. Thomas.
Augustinus.
in 1. dist. 45. partim in 2. dist. 37. et D. Thomas in II, dist. 37, as well as St. Thomas in I, q. 22 and q. 105.
1. q. 22. et q. 105. et legi potest Augustinus 16. De Augustine can also be read: De civ. Dei XVI, c. 8, and De Augustine.
civitate Dei cap. 8. et Liber 83 quaestionum, q. 24. div. quaest. octoginta tribus, q. 24.
Quomodo bruta animalia propter finem operentur. In what way brute animals act on account of an end.
12. Superest ut de Brutis animantibus pauca dica- 12. It remains for us to say a little about brute animals, for
mus, in eis enim maior quaedam apparet participa- in these there appears a certain greater participation in final
tio causalitatis finalis. Primo quidem, quia a bono causality. First, indeed, because they are metaphorically
sibi conveniente et cognito, metaphorice alliciuntur, drawn by a good that is agreeable to them and cognized, and
5 atque ita in illud tendunt per actum a se elicitum, 5R thus they tend to it through an act elicited from themselves
et ab illa motione metaphorica causatum: illa ergo and caused by that metaphorical motion. Therefore, that
motio aliqua realis causalitas est, et non nisi finalis. motion is some real causality but not unless final. Next, in
Deinde ut consequantur illud obiectum conveniens order to follow that agreeable object which they desired, they
quod appetivere, certa media etiam a se cognita ap- also desire certain means cognized by themselves with such
10 petunt tanta industria et prudentia, ut videantur 10R diligence and prudence that they clearly seem also to cognize
plane et cognoscere utilitatem eorum ad finem, et their utility towards the end and to desire them for its sake.
Lege Plinii, lib.
6. suæ
Historiae.
Plutarch in
proprio lib. De
Industria
animalium.
Porphyrus.
Aristoteles.
propter illam ea appetere. De qua sagacitate et in- Many philosophers write5 about this sagacity and diligence Read Pliny’s
History, book
6; Plutarch in
his own book
De industria
animalium.
Porphyry.
dustria animalium, et multa scribunt Philosophi, et of animals and it is obvious enough to us from our daily
quotidiana experientia nobis satis constat. Quae experience. This is why some philosophers were moved
15 adeo moverunt nonnullos Philosophos, ut existimar- 15R to think that brute animals use reason, although more
ent bruta uti ratione, licet imbecilliori et imperfectiori feebly and imperfectly than humans. This view is usually
quam homines. Quae sententia referri solet ex Por- attributed to Porphyry, De abstinentia III. Nevertheless, it
phyrio lib. 3. De abstinentia. Est tamen non solum is not only alien to the doctrine of our faith, but in truth
5First name in marginal note difficult to make out in original, so I’m not sure that it is ‘Plinii’. Book 8 of his Naturalis Historia would make sense,
though it is not as clear that book 6 makes sense.

-- 9 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 10
a doctrina nostrae fidei aliena, verum etiam ab omni also to all reason and to humans’ common sense. For
20 ratione et communi hominum sensu, nam poten- 20R rational power, as Aristotle said in Metaph. IX, is a power for Aristotle.
tia rationalis, ut Aristoteles dixit 9. Metaphysicae opposites, for in the middle of thinking about things to be
valens est ad opposita, nam medio discursu in rebus done it now uses this means and then another. But beasts
agendis nunc hoc medio, postea alio utitur: belluae do not act in this way, but always in the same way. This is
autem non ita operantur, sed semper eodem modo: a sufficient sign that they are led not by reason but by the
25 quod sufficiens signum est non ratione, sed impetu 25R impulse of nature. Add that, if the souls of brute animals
naturae duci. Adde, quod si animae brutorum ratio- were rational, they they would also be immortal.
nales essent, etiam essent immortales.
Bruta nihil
vere
cognoscere,
aut vitaliter
appetere,
absurdum.
13. Alii vero, ut hoc vitarent incommodum, in 13. But others, in order to avoid this disadvantage,
alium extremum errorem inciderunt, negantes bruta fell into the error of the other extreme, denying that any [The view] that
it is absurd
that brute
animals truly
cognize or
vitally desire.
30 quidquam <col. b> vere cognoscere aut appetere brute animals truly cognize or desire by an elicited appetite,
appetitu elicito, sed solum naturali pondere ferri, 30R [saying] instead that they are only carried off by a natural
ut lapidem, aut extrinsecus mota et attracta, sicut weight as a stone is or by something extrinsic having moved
ferrum trahitur a magnete. Verum hoc aeque absur- or attracted [them] as iron is drawn by a magnet. But this
dum est, et contra evidentem experientiam, immo truly is equally absurd and contrary to obvious experience
35 et contra divinam Scripturam. Verumtamen contra and, indeed, contrary to divine Scripture. Nevertheless,
hos duos errores in scientia de anima agendum est 35R more time should be spent against these two errors in the
latius. science of the soul.
Bruta
rationem finis
formaliter non
norunt.
14. Quod ergo ad praesens attinet, dicendum 14. Regarding what matters for the present, therefore, it
est bruta non cognoscere formaliter rationem finis should be said that brute animals do not formally cognize Brute animals
do not
formally know
the concept of
the end.
40 aut medii, quia non possunt unum cum alio con- the concept of the end or of means, since they cannot relate
ferre: unde nec in ipso fine cognoscunt propriam 40R one to the other. Hence, they also cannot cognize in the
rationem convenientiae propter quam est per se am- end itself the proper aspect of agreeability for the sake of
abilis, immo nec discernunt inter obiectum quatenus which it is lovable in itself. Indeed, they also cannot distin-
est conveniens per se, vel propter aliud, quia hoc to- guish between an object insofar as it is agreeable in itself
45 tum magnam discretionem rationis requirit. Aliquo or for the sake of something else, because all this requires
tamen modo cognoscunt et apprehendunt rem ali- 45R great discrimination of reason. Still, in another way they
quam, aut motionem ut sibi convenientem: et natu- cognize and apprehend some thing or motion as agreeable
rali instinctu iudicant sibi esse appetendum, prose- to themselves and judge by natural instinct that they ought
Lege D.
Thomam 1 p.
q. 78. art. 4. et
q. 87. art. 1.
ad 3. et 2. 2. q.
72. art. 1. ad 3.
quendum, vel fugiendum tale obiectum. Qui natu- to desire, pursue, or flee such an object. This natural in-
50 ralis instinctus nihil aliud est, quam quidam actus stinct is nothing other than a certain act of imagination or Read
St. Thomas,
Ia.78.4,
Ia.87.1 ad 3,
and
IIaIIæ.72.1 ad
3.
phantasiae seu aestimativae, necessitate naturali ab 50R the estimative power flowing by a natural necessity from
illa profluens posito phantasmate talis rei: quo actu that posited phantasm of such a thing. By this act a brute
practice (ut humano modo loquar) iudicat brutum animal practically (to speak in a human way) judges that
hoc esse sibi vitandum, vel prosequendum aut appe- this is to be avoided or to be pursued or to be desired, al-
55 tendum, quamvis non valeat rationem convenientiae though it does not have the power to discern the concepts of
vel disconvenientiae discernere. Hoc autem natu- 55R agreeability or disagreeability. Moreover, once this natural

-- 10 of 11 --

Suárez, DM XXIII, sect. 10 11
rali iudicio posito, appetitus etiam naturaliter illud judgement is posited, desire naturally also follows it.
sequitur.
Bruta quam
finis
causalitatem
participent.
15. Ex quo fit primo ut causalitas finis aliquo 15. From this it happens, first, that brute animals in
60 modo participetur a brutis, ut argumentum fac- some way participate in the causality of the end, as the How brute
animals
participate in
the causality
of the end.
tum convincit, quia illa appetitio elicita sine dubio argument that was made establishes, since that elicited
causatur ex metaphorica motione obiectiva boni con- 60R desire is without doubt caused by the objective metaphorical
venientis, quae non potest ad aliud genus causal- motion of the agreeable good, which cannot be referred to
itatis revocari. Nihilominus tamen addendum est another genus of causality. Nevertheless, it should still
65 illam causalitatem adeo esse imperfectam in eo be added that this causality is for this reason imperfect in
genere, ut sit quasi materialis motio finis potius that genus insofar as it is, as it were, a material motion of
D. Thomas. quam formalis, ut significavit D. Thomas 1. 2. q. 1. 65R the end rather than formal, as St. Thomas indicated in [ST ]
art. 2. et q. 6. art. 2. Et ratio est, quia non cognos- IaIIæ.1.2 and 6.2. And the reason is that they do not cognize St. Thomas.
cunt formalem rationem convenientiae vel utilitatis: the formal aspects of agreeability or utility. Therefore, they
70 ergo non ita moventur ut possint ordinare unum are not moved in such a way that they can order one to
in aliud, nec etiam aliquid formaliter appetere ut another nor can they formally desire something as lovable
propter se amabile: ergo non tendunt formaliter in 70R for its own sake. Therefore, they do not formally tend to
finem ut finem, nec in me- <890> dium ut medium; an end as an end, to a means as a means, to an end for
neque in finem propter se, et in medium propter its own sake, nor to a means for the sake of the end, but
75 finem, sed quantum est suo modo operandi, aeque insofar as it is in its way of acting they tend equally to
tendunt in utrumque; et ideo merito dicuntur mate- either and therefore are rightly said to act materially for
rialiter potius, quam formaliter propter finem oper- 75R the sake of the end rather than formally. Wherefore, with
ari. Quapropter quantum ad formalem relationem respect to a formal relation to the end, one should think
in finem ita existimandum est de actionibus bruto- about the actions of brute animals just as one thinks about
80 rum, sicut aliorum agentium naturalium. Idemque the other natural agents. And the judgement about the
iudicium est de appetitu sensitivo hominis si per se sensitive appetite of human beings is the same if it is only
solum consideretur, et non ut subest motioni volun- 80R considered in itself and not as subordinate to the motion of
tatis vel rationis, de quo alias. will or reason. [More] about this elsewhere.

-- 11 of 11 --
