Last revision: October 29, 2015
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE SCIENTIA DEI FUTURORUM
CONTINGENTIUM 1.81
© Sydney Penner 2015
<327, col. b>2
CHAPTER 8.
In what way, finally, God cognizes future contingents.
1. The reason for the difficulty. — In all divine matters it is more
difficult to understand how they are than how they are not. For
this reason, having rejected the unsatisfactory ways in which
these future [contingents] are cognized, what is left over for now
is what is more difficult: for us to show, if it can be done, the way
in which these are cognized [by God].
The reason for the difficulty, moreover, can be gathered well
enough from what was said, since it seems that they can be
cognized neither in something else nor in themselves. Therefore,
how can they be cognized? As a result of this difficulty, as I was
saying above, almost all the nominalists say that we can indeed
know (scire) by certain faith that God cognizes these things, yet it
is impossible for the human intellect to explain the way by which
he cognizes them. Ockham says this in I, dist. 38, q. 1, Gabriel
in q. 1, art. 2, after the second conclusion, Gregory in q. 2, art. 2,
and Antonio de Córdoba says almost the same thing in dub. 10
of the previously cited I, q. 55.3
2. These future [contingents] are cognized through a simple
intuition of truth. Nevertheless, it should be said that God cognizes
these future [contingents] only through a simple intuition of the
truth or of the thing that is future in its difference of time and
insofar as it is in that future and according to all the <328>
conditions of existence which are going to hold in that. The very
same authors teach in this way. For, although they say that we
cannot explain how this intuition happens—which is true, since
1Translation is based on the Vivés edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for
ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
31.7.4.

-- 1 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 2
we cannot conceive divine things as they are in themselves—they
do not, however, deny that we can understand that this kind
of intuition is possible and in some way can be assigned its
sufficient principle. Scotus, whom we cited above in chapter 5,
having admitted a determination of the divine will, also grants
this way. More often than not, it pleases the theologians of our
time, and it always seems pleasing to me. It was not, however,
invented by recent theologians, as certain people object, but
belongs to ancient theologians to whom we return. Indeed, even
St. Thomas and others who explain this through presence and
a simple intuition, meant nothing different, since it was shown
that they were not speaking about a presence according to real
existence. That having been set aside, one cannot think of any
other mode of presence.
3. That this way of cognizing is possible is shown. First,
therefore, I prove that this way is not impossible, since no re-
pugnance that it involves can be shown. Second, because not
only a present thing but also a past thing can be directly seen
and cognized in itself, since just as a present thing is determined
to one [possibility] so also a thing that was at one time. Hence,
the truth that is revealed concerning it is already determinate
and necessary. For this reason it is thought cognizable in itself
and through itself by simple intuition. It will, therefore, be the
same concerning future truth, which we showed above is also
determined to one [possibility].4 Third, because each thing, in the
way in which it is, is of itself cognizable, if the power is not lacking
on the part of the one cognizing. But just as a present and past
possible thing is understood to have its own proper disposition
(habitudinem) to being according to which it is cognizable, so also
even a future thing by reason of which the truth about the future
is always determinate. Therefore, this whole is, as far as the
side of the object is concerned, something cognizable. But no
power of cognizing can be lacking in God. Therefore, from this
we understand well enough that this mode of cognition is not
impossible.
4. What the principles of this cognition are. And from here
we further explain in some way the sufficient principles of this
cognition. These can be required on two sides. First, on the side
of the one cognizing. Concerning this there is no difficulty and
nothing new that we need to say. For in God his essence alone is
<col. b> the sufficient reason for any possible cognition, as much
41.2.6–9.

-- 2 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 3
in the mode of species as in the mode of potentiality or actuality
if the necessary things concur from elsewhere or from the side of
the object. For in the power and efficacy of his understanding God
is infinite without qualification. And from this very source arises
certainty and infallibility of every sort in that scientia, because
when it is essentially infinite it is also essentially directed to the
true and cannot fall short of that. Another source, therefore, is
the object itself and in this is the whole difficulty. For, since
nothing is before it exists, it is not clear how it can be visible of
itself and in itself or how by reason of it there is from eternity a
true proposition about the future, or what this truth is since it is
nothing real.
5. A way of speaking of some is explained and rejected. On
account of this, some people say that one should not look for
proportion or commensuration between scientia and object in this
cognition. For the former is not certain from the certitude of the
object but only from the eminence and perspicuity of the divine
intellect, which is able to cognize these objects more certainly
than they themselves are cognizables. For insofar as they are
not from eternity, to that extent they are of themselves uncertain.
Consequently, from their side no ratio of such scientia can be
given. But, nevertheless, God by his infinite power cognizes them
and, as it were, defeats that difficulty.
But this thus distinctly stated involves [or] seems to use a
repugnancy, because, just as the divine power cannot do that
which is not of itself doable, so also divine scientia cannot know
that which is not of itself knowable. Nor can a certain judgement
be brought about that which in itself is entirely uncertain. For
scientia cannot be brought beyond its object, nor can it in any way
not be commensurated to its object in certitude and infallibility,
since it requires adequation.
For this reason St. Thomas often says that scientia cannot
be necessary unless the object has necessity under some ratio by
which it is attained. This is the way in which objective certitude
can be required on the part of the object, that is, a mode of truth
such that it is apt that a certain and infallible judgement be
brought. Every truth, of course, has this by virtue of the fact that
truth is determinate.
6. Therefore, two dispositions should be distinguished in an
object: one is of a principle and the other as it were of a terminus.
In the former way, it is true that in the object of divine scientia
one should not look for an entity or reality through which there

-- 3 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 4
can be a principle of such scientia. For the scientia of God is
not taken from this object, especially since this object <329> is
secondary with respect to that scientia according to itself. And
so the difficulty ceases with respect to this.
But in the latter way future contingents can be the termini
of divine scientia, even if they do not from eternity have eternal
existence to God but only through their times. For to be the
terminus here is not something real and intrinsic in the object
determining the scientia but is an extrinsic denomination arising
from that scientia. Hence, if the scientia in itself otherwise has
a sufficient power for infallibly attaining such an object, it can
have its terminus in that object, even if there is no actual entity
or existence in that object through which it is the terminus for
such an act.
And this rightly explains the examples given about scientia of
past things as such. For past things insofar as they are past also
do not actually have any existence or entity with respect to those
times through which they are called past. The same is true in
the case of possible things, concerning which we said above that
they also are termini of cognition or scientia, since, nevertheless,
according to their state they do not have in themselves a proper
and actual entity but only in cause.
Inferences from the things said in this chapter.
7. First. From here one understands, first, how that being
which a contingent effect has or will have in its time can be a
sufficient foundation on the part of the object so that it can be
cognized through some eternal and most eminent scientia and
can be seen as perfectly from eternity as if it already were, even
though the being is not really from eternity. For, namely, it is
sufficient so that an act of intuition can have it as its terminus, if
from elsewhere there is sufficient power on the part of the knower.
8. Second: what the determinate truth is that these future
[contingents] have. Second, one understands what it is for these
truths or statements about future contingents to be determinately
true from eternity, and what their eternal truth is, since the thing
itself at that point is nothing. For properly that truth is even
formally only in the divine intellect, as St. Thomas rightly teaches
above, especially in the cited q. 16, art. 7,5 and what Aristotle
indicated about truth in general in Metaphysics 6. But on the part
51.7.19 (where the Vivès edition erroneously cites art. 2).

-- 4 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 5
of the objects, this truth is nothing other than a certain aptitude
or non-repugnance so that the intellect, having a sufficient power
to understand, can truly state or judge concerning such an object.
This aptitude in reality is nothing beyond the very being that the
thing in its time <col. b> will have, by reason of which it can
be related to an earlier time (and in that way is called future)
and to a later time (and in that way can be called past). For
this reason, this truth on the part of the object is usually called
fundamental [truth], which does not always require real existence
in act but only according to the ratio of truth. Hence, Aristotle in
Metaphysics 5, text. 14, and near the end of book 6, distinguished
two kinds of being: one that that truly is and one that, although
it is not, suffices for the truth of a proposition. In this way we
can here say that although this future [contingent] is not from
eternity, nevertheless, it, has a certain mode of being insofar as
it can sufficiently ground the truth of an eternal judgement or
statement, and can be the terminus of an act of understanding,
which by its power can be terminated in anything participating
for any reason in the ratio of being, whether present or future,
whether past or possible.
9. Third: what their objective presence is. From what has
been said, it is understood, third, what the objective presence
that we were speaking about above is. For it can be considered
in two ways. First, it can be considered in second act or, rather,
with respect to a second and ultimate act. In this sense, objective
presence is nothing other than actually being seen. Concerning
presence explained in this way, it is very truly said that it does
not precede even according to reason the scientia, and that for
this reason the ratio of scientia cannot be rendered from such
presence since the latter comes to be through the former.
In the second way, [objective presence] can be taken aptitu-
dinally, as in the case of sensible things an object, even though
not actually seen, is said to be objectively present when it is so
nearby, illuminated, and arranged that it can be seen as far as
it is concerned. In the present case, then, if we wish to explain
objective presence in this way, it is nothing other than the very
being that a thing will in its time have. It is said to be present
according to existence in relation to the time in which it actually
exists, yet future relative to all previous time, true or imaginary,
before it comes to be. That being, therefore, insofar as it is a
sufficient foundation on the side of the terminating object so that
it can be seen by God (as was explained), is a sufficient ratio on

-- 5 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 6
the side of the same object so that it can be present to an act
of intuitive scientia. This aptitude on the part of the thing to be
cognized, therefore, can be called, for its part, objective presence.
And there is nothing else that can be considered.
10. Fourth: why eternity, and the coexistence of things with
it, is required for that cognition. Fourth, from what was said it is
understood in what way eternity, or the coexistence with eternity,
<330> is necessary for this scientia of future [contingents]. For,
in the first place, on the side of the divine scientia, the very fact
that it is eternal is necessary in order to be able eternally to attain
whatever in time is future. For it belongs to the ratio of the eternal
to have its whole perfection all at once. Moreover, it belongs to
the perfection of scientia to attain every knowable object by the
very fact that it is knowable. Therefore, it cannot be that divine
scientia acquires this perfection little by little. Therefore, from
the power of its eternity it has that whole all at once from eternity
itself, just as for its part it also at once has whatever is necessary
for really coexisting with any thing whatever (if it itself exists). But
on the part of things, in order that they can be known absolutely
and eternally, it is necessary that they coexist with eternity at
some time or another, even if that coexistence is not eternal, as I
said. Nevertheless, on the part of the object, in order that it can
be the terminus for eternal scientia, it is necessary that it exist
at least at some time.
11. But in what way St. Thomas infers the scientia of future
[things] from eternity. From here one can also understand what
force St. Thomas’s discussion in the aforementioned ST Ia.14.13
has, where he infers this foreknowledge of future [things] from
God’s eternity. It should be noted that at the beginning of that
article, St. Thomas assumes as certain that God in some way
cognizes these future things, which he proves from the this alone:
because ‘God cognizes all things that are in his power or in the
power of a created thing and certain of these things are future
contingents to us, and so God cognizes even future contingents.’6
This argument, if considered closely, immediately proves only
that God has scientia of those things that are contingently fu-
ture only insofar as possible things exist contingently, because
nothing else is cognized from the force of a cognition of a power
or of a cause. But because God not only cognizes those things
that are in his power or in the power of a created thing as they
are in themselves but also as they are in him, by directly and
6ST Ia.14.13 co.

-- 6 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 7
properly conceiving and cognizing them, therefore, St. Thomas
also assumes as known that God has some kind of scientia of
future things contingently in themselves and as they are in him.
Hence, at the very least, it is also clear that God can cognize the
actual existence of such things, at least when they have it. All
that remains to prove for him is that God can cognize things of
this sort and their actual existence before they actually are in
themselves, and to that extent can cognize those to be future.
For these two things are either converted or, rather, are the same
thing with respect to one who cognizes future things in a perfect
way and through a clear intuition.
St. Thomas, then, very well makes the proof on the basis
of the eternity <col. b> of divine scientia. For, he says, God’s
cognition is measured by eternity, just as his being is.7 He un-
derstands this concerning that cognition and scientia not only as
it is understood absolutely in God according to his real being but
also as it is understood by us under some respect or termination
in some cognizable object. For it belongs to the infinite perfection
of God that in this way there can be no variation in the scientia of
that [object], since it is neither possible for the scientia itself to be
augmented in reality nor possible not to represent simultaneously
everything that can be cognized through that very [scientia]. For
it represents naturally and necessarily, having assumed truth or
cognizabilit in the object. For this reason, then, not only divine
being but also his scientia is measured by eternity.
From this St. Thomas further gathers that the divine scientia
includes in its eternal intuition everything existing in any time ‘as
they are in their presentiality’, that is, as each has real presence
in its time. That is what is put before the eternal divine view. For
if that scientia is measured by eternity even as it is understood to
be under every respect, it has that respect of scientia or intuition
to each thing as it will be in its time. And that is what it is to
have a future thing present in its eternity. It is the same thing to
cognize these truths about future contingents in themselves. For
God does not cognize them through the mode of combination or
composition, but by intuiting the actual existences of individual
things according to their times. And this is the way the old
Thomists understood this discussion by St. Thomas cited at the
end of the previous chapter, especially Giles of Rome in I, dist.
38, the last question. Alexander of Hales seems to use the same
[understanding] in I, q. 23, memb. 4, art. 4. And this argument
7ST Ia.14.13 co.

-- 7 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 8
was explained in this way not only through extrinsic and common
[features], as certain people suggest, but from propria and a
priori from the side of divine scientia, because, namely, it at the
same time has all the possible perfection of scientia yet always
presupposing cognizability on the part of the object. The object
has this cognizability in virtue of the fact that it will have existence
at some time and will coexist with eternity, as was sufficiently
explained.
12. Finally, it is gathered what cognition of the cause is re-
quired for this scientia. Finally, one understands from what has
been said that a certain cognition of the cause is necessary for
having a certain scientia of future contingents. For, although we
said above in chapter 3 with St. Thomas that these future [things]
are not sufficiently cognized in cause, <331> nevertheless it is
true that they are not cognized without a cause (that is, without
the influx and determination of cause). Thus, in a word, we can
say that they are not cognized in cause but are cognized as from
a cause, that is, not by seeing the effect only in the power of a
cause, but by seeing its emanation from its cause. This seems es-
pecially necessary in the case of God’s scientia, since, as we said,
it is intuitive and most perfect. Hence, it is also comprehensive
of such an effect and for that reason does not cognize it without
intuiting its emanation from its cause.
But two causes come up directly and are relevant as far as
the present case is concerned, namely, the divine will and a
human will. Therefore, the determination of each needs to be
cognized through this scientia in order to cognize the contingently
future effect. But this determination in the human will is nothing
other than the very action through which it elicits free consent
insofar as it is from itself, as was shown in detail in the books
on de auxiliis. Therefore, to cognize the determination of such a
causes is to cognize the very emanation of such a future effect
from such a cause, for there is no intervening thing between
that action and the power (under which we comprehend its every
first act). And therefore, to cognize the effect and its emanation
from such a cause in its determination is nothing other than to
cognize the emanation in itsef and the effect as it will emanate or
is emanating from its cause.
But in the divine will, the determination is understood to be
through an eternal free decree by which it wills to inflow [being]
into such an effect at such a time. This decree, whatever it is is,
in our way of understanding mediates between the divine will and

-- 8 of 9 --

Suárez, De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium 1.8 9
the action or determination of the human will insofar as it is from
God. And in relation to the divine will it is a transeunt action,
although it is immanent in the human will. For this reason, such
a decree is not from the divine will as from an action, because
it is not an action to the action. Therefore, it is as from a cause
and, if I may put it like this, as from a proximate principle on the
part of God. Therefore, it is necessary to cognize this effect as
going to be from such a cause.
Cognition of the divine decree is also necessary. The result of
this is that in order to cognize future contingents in the stated
perfect way, it is also necessary to cognize the decree of the divine
will from which each future thing comes. A direct cognition of
the decree alone is not sufficient, as I said, but it is necessary.
Otherwise, the emanation of the effect from its whole cause
cannot be cognized.
Nor is it the case that someone is stuck in future sin in virtue
of not being from some decree of God as from a cause. For,
although this is true of a sin insofar as it is a sin, nevertheless,
the free act itself by which the sin comes about and without
which it would not have come about and as it is here and now is
not separable from the evil. That act, I say, is from some decree
of God in its genus. For this reason, cognition of that decree
is necessary for cognizing the future effect. Indeed, although
we imagine the future [effect] without any positive act through
a pure omission, it will be necessary to pre-cognize the decree
permitting such a sin, although the decree is not its cause but
only a non-impeding. In order to cognise a future effect it is not
enough to cognize that the intrinsic cause will be determined
to it if it is not impeded. It must also be known that it will not
be impeded by some extrinsic cause, which on the part of God
depends on the aforementioned decree.
From these things it is customary to infer further that this
scientia of future contingents is, according to reason, posterior
in God to the free decrees about those future contingents. But
whether and in what way this is so we will discuss more fully at
the end of the following book.8
82.8.

-- 9 of 9 --
