Sydney Penner
Last revised: July 25, 2008
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE VOLUNTARIO ET INVOLUNTARIO DISP. 6, SECT. 11
<241, col. b>
CONCERNING THE WILL, INTENTION, AND PRIOR ACTS OF THE INTELLECT (De voluntate,
et intentione, actibusque intellectus præviis)
From the beginning of this second treatise we so far examined two general differentia of human
acts which are indicated by ‘voluntary’ and ‘involuntary’. It remains for us to deal with the species
of the acts of the will in this second part of the same treatise. We will, nevertheless, mix in a
discussion about the acts of the intellect because they are conducive for clearly explaining the acts
of the will. It should also be noted that the name ‘will’ in the present title does not convey a power
but an act, although in the discussion of the doctrine we will sometimes digress also to the power.
Every action of the will, then, turns either concerning an end or concerning a means. That comes
to happen two-fold: either in desiring or in attaining. From this a two-fold order arises of acts of
the will and of the practical intellect, which governs the will in morals. Prior to all those it contains
the acts which are necessary all the way to the next election of a means, which are will, intention,
deliberation, consent, and election. The first three concern the end and the last concern the means,
respectively. As a result of the election having been established, moreover, the will progresses to
a free execution. And thus is the second order, in which only two acts are numbered: command
and use. To those two acts is added enjoyment, which is not an action in desiring or pursuing
an appointed end, but rather it soon follows an end having been attained. In addition, all those
acts directly tend to some object. Still, often they are as if reflexive so that when the will elects a
means it elects to elect and it uses itself and the intellect, etc. Yet this as if reflection of the acts
does not happen through acts distinct from those having been directed, although Cajetan thinks
the opposite in [ST ] IaIIæ.16.4. Therefore, we will talk in passing about directed and reflexive
acts, which will be necessary. But we will talk about acts before the achievement of the end in this
disputation.
A principio hujus secundi tractatus, hucusque disseruimus de duabus differentiis gen-
eralibus actuum humanorum, quæ per voluntarium, et involuntarium declarantur.
Restat in hac secunda parte ejusdem tractatus, ut in specie de actibus voluntatis aga-
mus. Miscebimus tamen sermonem de actibus intellectus, quia ad explicandos volun-
tatis actus plane conducunt. Illud etiam attendendum, voluntatis nomen in præsenti
titulo non potentiam, sed actum importare : licet in discursu doctrinæ, ad ipsam
quoque potentiam aliquando digrediamur. Omnis igitur voluntatis actio aut circa
finem, aut circa medium versatur : quod dupliciter contingit fieri : aut appetendo,
aut exequendo : ex quo duplex oritur ordo actuum voluntatis, et intellectus practici,
qui voluntatem gubernat in moribus. Prior omnes illos actus continet, qui necessarii
sunt, usque ad postremam medii electionem, qui sunt, voluntas, intentio, consilium,
consensus, electio. Tres priores circa finem : posteriores circa medium (eo quo nu-
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition.

-- 1 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 2
merati sunt ordine) versantur. Stabilita autem electione, progreditur voluntas ad lib-
eram executionem : et sic est secundus ordo, in quo duo tantum actus numerantur :
imperium et usus : quibus actibus fruitio additur, quæ non est operatio ad finem vel
appetendum, vel assequendum ordinata, sed fine potius comparato, ipsa subsequitur.
Omnes præterea actus isti directe tendunt in aliqua objecta, sæpe tamen sunt quasi
reflexi, ut dum voluntas eligit medium, eligit eligere, et utitur seipsa, et <242> intel-
lectu, etc., tamen hæc actuum quasi reflexio non fit per actus ab ipsis rectis distinctos,
licet Cajetanus 1, 2, quæst. 16, art. 4, oppositum censeat. Dicemus igitur de actibus di-
rectis et de reflexis obiter, quæ erunt necessaria. In hac autem disputatione de actibus
ante consecutionem finis agemus.
SECTION I
CONCERNING THE OBJECTS, NATURES, AND DIFFERENCES OF WILL AND INTENTION (De
objectis, rationibus, et differentiis voluntatis et intentionis.)
1. First, what the act of willing is.—These are all bound up with each other to such an extent that
it is not possible helpfully to explain one without the other. In the first place, then, ‘will’ signifies
a certain simple act of the will, which is as if a first inclination of the will to a proposed object
as it is lovable per se, of which the formal effect cannot be other than to will that object for its
own sake without order to another. This act is called simple because it presupposes no other act
[and] it does not include another either formally or virtually. From which it is clear that this
act is properly concerned with an end. For only an end is good [and] lovable per se and because
the principle of all motion of the will is an end. Moreove, this is the first motion of the will, as
Aristotle teaches in EN III, c. 2.
Primus actus volendi quid.—Hæc omnia adeo inter se nexa sunt, ut non possit unum
sine altero commode explicari. Imprimis igitur voluntas significat simplicem quem-
dam actum voluntatis, qui est quasi prima inclinatio voluntatis in objectum proposi-
tum tanquam per se amabile, cujus effectus formalis non potest esse alius, quam velle
illud objectum propter se, sine ordine ad aliud, qui actus dicitur simplex, quia nullum
alium supponit neque formaliter, neque virtute alterum includit : ex quo patet hunc
actum proprie versari circa finem : solus enim finis est bonum per se amabile, et quo-
niam principium omnis motus voluntatis est finis : hic autem est primus voluntatis
motus, ut docet Aristoteles 3, Ethic. 2.
2. A different signification of ‘intention’. What intention properly is.—‘To intend’ by a certain gen-
eral signification is to tend to something else, [i.e., to aim at something else]. From this etymology
the name ‘intention’ has various significations. For it customarily signifies both the attention of
the mind and the application of the senses. And sometimes inanimate things are said to intend
their ends. But in the proposition it signifies a certain free or perfectly voluntary tendency to
some end, which is proper to things having use of reason. From which it is clear that intention
here signifies something pertaining to the intellect or to the will. But what it is, others explain
otherwise. St. Bonaventure in [Sent.] II, dist. 38, q. 2 says that ‘intention’ pertains equally to will
and to intellect [and] he says that it is not one act but as if having been mixed from two. Because
‘intention’ expresses a desire for that which it intends and a bringing together of one to another.
But it first pertains to the will and second to the intellect, which are conjoined. Aureolus, in
view of Capreolus, [Sent.] I, dist. 1, q. 1 says that ‘intention’ is not an act but the circumstance
of election, because to intend is only to do here for the sake of something. But here conveys the
circumstance of the end in the election.
Intentionis varia significatio.—Intentio proprie quid.—Intendere significatione quadam

-- 2 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 3
generali est in aliud tendere : ex qua etymologia nomen intentionis varias habet sig-
nificationes : nam et mentis attentionem, et sensuum applicationem significare solet,
et interdum res inanimes dicuntur intendere suos fines. In proposito vero signifi-
cat quamdam liberam, vel perfecte voluntariam tendentiam in aliquem finem : quæ
propria est rei utentis ratione : ex quo constat, intentionem hic aliquid significare ad
intellectum, vel voluntatem pertinens. Quid vero sit, alii aliter explicant. D. Bonaven-
tura 2, dist. 38, 2 part., quæst. 2, dicit intentionem ad voluntatem, et intellectum æque
pertinere, quam ait, non esse unum actum, sed quasi mixtum ex duobus : quia inten-
tio dicit appetitionem ejus, qui intendit, et collationem unius ad alterum. Primum
vero pertinet ad voluntatem, secundum ad intellectum, quæ conjunguntur. Aureolus,
apud Capreolum, 1, dist. 1, quæst. 1, ait, intentionem non esse actum, sed circumstan-
tiam electionis, quia intendere solum est alicujus gratia hoc facere, hoc vero importat
circumstantiam finis in electione. <col. b>
3. Assertion: intention is a proper act of the will.—The object of intention is the end itself.—It should
be said, nevertheless, that by this name is conveyed a certain proper act of the will. This is the
view of St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.8 and of the teachers in [Sent.] II, dist. 38, where Augustine
says that ‘intention’ expresses love, Psalms 7 and 9. And the reason is because to intend in this
case is to voluntarily tend to something. Moreover, the principle of motion and of tendency is the
will, whence it is confirmed. For whether human behaviour is good or bad depends chiefly on
intention. But it depends on the will. But from St. Bonaventure’s argument is only concluded that
that intention of the will presupposes a judgement and a rule of reason, just as progressive motion,
which example he uses, requires direction from some power of the cognizer. But to Aureolus is
responded that the end is sometimes the circumstance of election. Still, the very intention of the
end is an act of the will. From which we further gather that the object of this act is the end itself,
which is the common view. Indeed for that reason the goodness or badness of an act is weighed
by intention, especially because it itself is on account of the end and the end is the principle of
human acts, as is clear in virtue of the name. For ‘to intend’ is to tend to something else. But we
tend to a terminus and the terminus of the will is the end.
Assertio. Intentio est proprius actus voluntatis.—Objectum intentionis est ipse finis.—
Dicendum tamen est, hoc nomine importari proprium quemdam actum voluntatis
quæ sententia est D. Thomæ 1, 2, quæst. 8, et doctorum 2, dist. 38, unde Augustinus
intentionem vocat amorem, Psalm. 7 et 9. Et ratio est, quia intendere hic est in aliquid
voluntarie tendere : principium autem motionis, et tendentiæ est voluntas, unde con-
firmatur : nam ex intentione potissimum pendent mores hominum, ut boni, vel mali
sint : pendent vero ex voluntate. Ex ratione vero D. Bonaventuræ solum concluditur,
istam intentionem voluntatis supponere judicium, et ordinem rationis, sicut motus
progressivus, quo exemplo ipse utitur, directionem alicujus potentiæ cognoscentis re-
quirit. Ad Aureolum vero respondetur, finem esse interdum circumstantiam electio-
nis : tamen ipsam intentionem finis esse actum voluntatis. Ex quo ulterius colligimus
hujus actus objectum esse finem ipsum ; quæ est sententia communis : ideo enim
bonitas, vel malitia actus ab intentione pensatur, maxime quia ipse est circa finem, et
finis est principium humanorum actuum, ut patet ex vi nominis : nam intendere est
in aliud tendere : tendimus vero in terminum, et terminus voluntatis est finis.
4. In what will and intention differ.—But from this arises a question: in what way are will and
intention distinguished, since they have the same object, namely, the end? It is responded: there
are two aspects in the end. The first is a certain good lovable per se, and as such it is the object of
the will. This is clear because will is first and foremost an act of the will which tends to the object

-- 3 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 4
first and foremost under a certain aspect. This, moreover, is the aspect of good per se without any
order to another thing.
The second aspect is of its good as it ought to be pursued through means, and in this way it is the
object of intention. This is also clear by virtue of the name. For we properly tend to an end when
consider how to achieve it. Whence it is gathered that ‘intention’ of an end is only found in the
absence of that end. This is why God does not properly intend his felicity, yet wills and loves it.
Hence, the will can remain even with the end having been achieved, which also makes manifest
the distinction between these acts.
Voluntas et intentio in quo differant.—Sed ex his oritur quæstio, quo modo voluntas
et intentio distinguantur, cum habeant idem objectum, scilicet finem? Respondetur
: in fine duæ sunt rationes. Prima est quoddam bonum per se amabile, et ut sic est
objectum voluntatis : quod patet, quia voluntas est primus et simplicissimus actus vol-
untatis, qui tendit in objectum sub prima quadam et simplicissima ratione : hæc autem
est ratio boni per se, sine ullo ordine ad aliud. Secunda ratio est ejus boni investigandi
per media, et hoc modo est objectum intentionis : quod patet etiam ex vi nominis :
tunc enim proprie tendimus in finem, quando de illius consecutione tractamus. Unde
colligitur, intentionem finis solum reperiri in absentia ipsius finis : quare Deus non
intendit proprie suam felicitatem, tamen vult, et amat eam : unde voluntas manere
potest etiam consecuto fine, quod etiam distinctionem istorum actuum manifestat.
5. Will and love of the end are entirely the same act.—From this difference is inferred, first, that will
is not distinct from love. For the nature of love is to tend to absolute good, whether present or
absent. This, however, is the same as the nature of that act which is called ‘will’. It only seems
that it should be added that the name ‘love’ can be used more generally and can sometimes signify
an affection of the will, either concerning a means or concerning an end. Yet in speaking about
the love for an end or for a good for its own sake, it is not apparent how it can be distinguished
from that act which is will. This is confirmed: for this act of love of itself is also most simple and
presupposes nothing else, from which it happens that the act of intention is distinguished from
love in the same way as from the act which is will.
Voluntas et amor finis prorsus idem actus.—Ex qua differentia infertur primo, volun-
tatem non esse distinctam ab amore : nam ratio amoris est tendere in bonum absolute
sive præsens sit, sive absens : hæc autem eadem <243> est ratio istius actus, qui dic-
itur Voluntas. Solum videtur addendum, amoris nomen posse universalius usurpari,
et significare aliquando affectionem voluntatis, sive circa medium, sive circa finem :
tamen loquendo de amore finis, seu boni propter se, non apparet, quomodo possit
distingui ab illo actu, qui est Voluntas. Quod confirmatur : nam hic actus amoris de
se etiam est simplicissimus, et nullum alium supponit : ex quo fit, ut actus intentionis
eo modo distinguatur ab amore, quo ab actu, qui est voluntas.
6. How some do not distinguish desire from intention.—Secondly, many gather that the act of inten-
tion is not distinguished from the act of desire, because it seems to be compared to desire just as will
is to love. For ‘desire’ by a general signification signifies any appetite for obtaining a good which
someone lacks. And it extends not only to an appetite of the effective will but also to imperfect
volitions or willings even of things impossible in themselves. But ‘intention’ only seems to signify
an absolute and effective will for obtaining through appropriate means a loved end.
Hence, if we talk about desire not in that general signification, but insofar as it is an effective desire
for an end, then in that way it does not seem to have a formal nature distinct from intention,

-- 4 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 5
because it is the same formal object, namely, to obtain an absent good. For since usually it is said
that the nature of desire is to be such that it is turned concerning an absent good, it should not be
understood that the desire is turned concerning the very absence. For, rather, it flees that but is
turned under a certain concept which necessarily presupposes an absence. This, however, is not
the concepts of good as such alone. For thus it is indifferent to absence and presence. Therefore, it
expresses the attainment of good not already had. But intention desires this very thing. Therefore,
etc.
Desiderium quomodo aliqui ab intentione non distinguant.—Secundo colligunt multi,
actum intentionis non distingui ab actu desiderii, quia ita videtur ad desiderium com-
parari, sicut voluntas ad amorem, desiderium enim generali significatione quamcum-
que appetitionem obtinendi boni, quo aliquis caret, significat : et non solum ad appe-
titionem efficacis voluntatis, sed etiam ad imperfectas volitiones, vel velleitates rerum
etiam impossibilium sese extendit : intentio vero solum videtur significare absolutam
et efficacem voluntatem obtinendi finem amatum per media consentanea. Quocirca
si de desiderio non in illa generali significatione loquamur, sed prout est desiderium
efficax finis, isto modo non videtur habere rationem formalem distinctam ab inten-
tione, quia habet idem formale objectum, scilicet obtinere bonum absens : nam cum
dici solet, de ratione desiderii esse, ut versetur circa bonum absens, non est intelligen-
dum, desiderium versari circa ipsam absentiam : nam potius istam fugit, sed versatur
sub quadam ratione, quæ necessario supponit absentiam, hæc autem non est sola ratio
boni ut sic : nam sic indifferens est ad absentiam et præsentiam : ergo dicit consecu-
tionem boni non habiti : sed hoc ipsum appetit intentio : ergo : etc.
7. As others distinguish [them].—Others, nevertheless, distinguish these acts in this way. Desire,
they say, abstracts from the means concerning which intention in some way is turned. This is clear
for this reason: when I love a good which I lack, I immediately desire it without any cognition of
means. Indeed, it can happen that the means are not necessary and, nevertheless, there is a desire.
And from this desire the consideration of means and the intention are born. But others say that
the desire is not an act by a mode of volition but by a mode of a certain passion which is born
from the love for a good and its absence, which is as a certain quasi-distress, which is opposed to
the delight of a good that is present. And it is clear because desire and delight are opposed. But
delight is the contrary of this distress. Therefore, etc.
Alii ut distinguant.—Alii nihilominus actus istos ita distinguunt. Desiderium (inqui-
unt) abstrahit a mediis, circa quæ intentio aliquo modo versatur : quod sic patet :
cum amo bonum, quo careo, statim illud desidero sine ulla cognitione mediorum :
imo contingit, media non esse necessaria, et nihilominus esse desiderium : et ex hoc
desiderio nascitur consideratio mediorum, et intentio. Alii vero dicunt, desiderium
non esse actum per modum volitionis : sed per modum cujusdam passionis quæ ex
amore boni, et absentia ejus nascitur, quæ est quasi ærumna quædam, quæ opponitur
delectationi de bono præsenti : et patet, quia desiderium et delectatio opponuntur :
sed <col. b> delectatio contraria est huic ærumnæ : ergo, etc.
8. The true view does not distinguish desire from intention.—But the former way seems more proven
to me, because desire ought not to be understood by a mode of volition. But that distress concern-
ing which the last view speaks rather is a certain avoidance and a quasi-nolition of the way of
sadness concerning the bad that is present. It is a sign of this that it arises not from the goodness
of the object but from its absence, because the absences is apprehended under the aspect of bad.
And therefore it is opposed not only to this perfect delight which arises from the good now hav-

-- 5 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 6
ing been achieved, but also that imperfect [delight] which usually arises from the hope for a good
already being pursued.
And therefore it is usually said that desire afflicts the soul not through itself but by reason of
the lack and as the principle of this distress, concerning which it is rightly said that it is by the
mode of passion. But desire is not opposed to delight in the way of a contrary, but in the way
of a terminus. But that act which the second view was saying was desire can perhaps be a certain
ineffective desire. Nevertheless, if it is effective and distinct from love, it cannot express order to
the achievement of the object, as was sufficiently shown. But that which that view devises—that
good can be absent and yet nothing be a necessary means—cannot happen. And all these things are
confirmed by parallels from the sensible appetite. Someone, although he cannot perfectly intend
the end, yet in his way can at least [intend] the material [end]. But his intention by the love
having been supposed does not exist unless [there is] a desire. Therefore, the same perfect desire
in the will will be his perfect intention.
Vera sententia desiderium ab intentione non distingui.—Sed prior modus mihi magis
probatur, quia desiderium intelligi debet per modum volitionis, illa vero ærumna de
qua ultima sententia loquitur, potius est fuga quædam, et quasi nolitio ad modum tris-
titiæ de malo præsenti : cujus signum est, quia non ex objecti bonitate, sed ex absentia
oritur, quæ absentia apprehenditur sub ratione mali, et ideo opponitur delectationi
non solum illi perfectæ, quæ oritur, bono jam consecuto, sed etiam illi imperfectæ,
quæ ab spe boni jamjam consequendi oriri solet : et ideo dici solet desiderium af-
fligere animam, non per se, sed ratione carentiæ, et ut illius ærumnæ principium, de
qua vere dicitur, esse per modum passionis : desiderium vero non isto modo opponi-
tur delectationi tanquam contrario, sed tanquam via termino : ille vero actus, quem
secunda sententia aiebat esse desiderium, forte esse potest desiderium quoddam inef-
ficax : tamen si sit efficax, et ab amore distinctum, non potest non dicere ordinem ad
consecutionem objecti, ut satis ostensum est. Quod vero illa sententia fingit, bonum
esse posse absens, et tamen nullum esse necessarium medium, fieri non potest. Et
confirmantur hæc omnia a simili ex appetitu sensibili : qui licet non possit perfecte
intendere finem, suo tamen modo potest saltem materialem. Ejus vero intentio sup-
posito amore, non est nisi desiderium : ergo idem desiderium perfectum in voluntate
erit perfecta ejus intentio.
9. Imperfect enjoyment does not appear per se in the order of intention.—Neither the act of hope.—
Although it is sometimes reduced.—By these the view of Aureolus and Gregory—who do not distin-
guish these acts of love and desire with respect to an end not having been achieved and therefore
also not will and intention—is proven to be false. Besides what has been said, we will speak against
them when the discussion will be about enjoyment. Secondly, concerning an end not yet having
been achieved the will can have only two perfect acts, which are necessary for its achievement,
namely, will and intention. Or love and desire can have other imperfect [acts], but which are
reduced to those.
But Cajetan in [ST ] IaIIæ.16.4 adds another act which he says pertains to the order of intention,
namely, imperfect enjoyment. But still this act, even imperfect, is in its genus and does not prop-
erly appear per se in the order of intention. One, because it is concerning the end as it has been
achieved in some way. Also, because it is not an act ordered per se to the achievement of the inten-
tion of the end. But it is a quasi-passion resulting from hope of the propinquity of the end. This
act was instituted by the author of nature so that one would persevere more easily and constantly
in the intention of an end.
The major difficulty would be concerning the act itself of hope, which is also concerning an end

-- 6 of 7 --

Suárez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 6, sec. 1 7
not already had. And it is necessary per se and directly ordained to the achievement of the end.
But it should be said that acts of hope are not per se necessary in this quasi-line of human acts but
by accident concerning some arduous and excellent object, so that the appetite is strengthened,
and it is common to acts about the end and about the means. And, finally, since it is necessary,
it is turned concerning the end and is reduced to intention. For it is a certain quasi-volition for
obtaining an end that seems as arduous and excellent as you like.
Fruitio imperfecta non spectat per se ad ordinem intentionis.—Neque etiam actus spei.—
Quamvis aliquando reducatur.—Ex his efficitur falsam esse sententiam Aureoli et Gre-
gorii, qui respectu finis non consecuti non distinguunt hos actus amoris et desiderii,
atque adeo neque voluntatem et intentionem : contra quos præter dicta agemus, cum
de fruitione erit sermo. Secundo circa finem nondum acquisitum solum duos actus
perfectos posse habere voluntatem, qui ad illius consecutionem sint necessarii, scil-
icet voluntatem et intentionem : sive amorem, et desiderium imperfectos vero posse
habere alios, qui tamen ad istos reducantur. Cajetanus vero 1, 2, q. 16, art. 4, addidit
alium actum, quem dicit pertinere ad ordinem intentionis, scilicet fruitionem imper-
fectam : sed tamen hic actus et imperfectus est in suo genere, et per se proprie ad
ordinem intentionis non spectat : tum quia <244> est de fine ut aliquo modo con-
secuto : tum quia non est actus per se ordinatus ad consecutionem intentionis finis
: sed est quasi passio resultans ex spe, vel propinquitate finis : qui actus ab auctore
naturæ fuit institutus, ut in intentione finis quis facilius, et constantius perseveret.
Major difficultas esset de ipso actu spei, qui etiam est circa finem non habitum : et
per se est necessarius, et directe ordinatus ad consecutionem finis. Sed dicendum est,
spei actuum per se non esse necessarium in hac quasi linea actuum humanorum, sed ex
accidenti circa aliquod objectum quod arduum est, et excellens, ut appetitus confirme-
tur, et communis est actibus circa finem, et circa medium : et tandem cum necessarius
est, versatur circa finem, et ad intentionem reducitur : est enim quasi volitio quædam
obtinendi finem, quantumvis arduus, et excellens videatur.

-- 7 of 7 --
