Last revision: December 29, 2010	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS, DISP. 151
© Sydney Penner 2010
<144>2
DE HIS QUÆ AD NATURALEM BEATITUDINEM PERTINENT. ON THOSE THINGS WHICH BELONG TO NATURAL HAPPINESS.
De hac re aliqua supra dicta sunt, quæ hic sunt supponenda, Some things were said above concerning this matter which need to be as-
tradentes enim nonnullas <col. b> divisiones beatitudinis, disp. 4, sumed here, for when discussing some divisions of happiness in disp. 4,
sect. 3, ostendimus, necessarium esse dari aliquam beatitudinem sect. 3, we showed that it is necessary to grant some natural happiness
5 hominis naturalem. Deinde, tractando de objecto beatitudinis, 5R for a human being. Next, in discussing the object of happiness in disp. 5,
disp. 5, sect. 2, ostendi solum Deum esse objectum beatitudi- sect. 2, I showed that only God is the object even of natural happiness,
nis etiam naturalis, quoniam ipse solus est finis ultimus hominis because he alone is the ultimate end for a human being under any aspect
quacumque ratione consideretur. Rursus, disputando de essentia that might be considered. On the other hand, in disputing about the
formalis beatitudinis, disp. 6, sect. 2, conclusimus commune esse formal essence of happiness in disp. 6, sect. 2, we concluded that what is
10 beatitudini naturali, ut in operatione consistat, et consequenter 10R common to natural happiness is that it consists in action and that con-
illam debere esse operationem mentis, seu partis intellectivæ, se- sequently it must be the action of the mind or of the intellective part
cundum quam est homo capax Dei. Reliquum ergo est ut aliqua in virtue of which a human being has the capacity for God. It remains,
addamus, quæ de hac beatitudine desiderari possunt: quæ fere therefore, to add something about those things which can be desired con-
ad similitudinem eorum, quæ de supernaturali beatitudine dicta cerning this happiness. Which ones are generally similar to those which
15 sunt, erunt explicanda. 15R were attributed to supernatural happiness will be explained.
SECTIO I. SECTION I.
In quo consistat proprie hæc beatitudo naturalis. In what this natural happiness properly consists.
1. Sententia
Philosophi.
1. Omissis aliorum philosophorum sententiis, de quibus supra 1. Omitting the views of other philosophers (which were discussed 1. The view of
the Philosopher.	dictum est, sententia Aristotelis, ut etiam attigimus, in disp. 30, above), the question regarding the view of Aristotle (as we also touched
20 Metaphysicæ, sect. 11, a num. 36, in hoc negotio est, propriam 20R on in DM XXX.11 from n. 36) lies in this: [whether] the proper and
et perpetuam beatitudinem hominis consistere in contempla- everlasting happiness of a human being consists in the contemplation of
tione substantiarum separatarum, quod præsertim intelligen- separate substances. This should be understood especially in the aspect
dum est, ratione divinæ substantiæ, vel naturæ, cætera vero om- of divine substances or natures; all the other [substances or natures],
nia requiri ut dispositiones quasdam ad hanc contemplationem. indeed, are required as certain dispositions towards this contemplation.
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628
edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès
edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 2
25 Sic toto libr. 1, Ethic., et libr. 10, cap. 8 et 9, et ideo 7, Polit., 25R Thus in all of book I of EN and book X, cap. 8 and 9. And for that rea-
cap. 3, hanc contemplationem præfert omni humanæ actioni, son in Pol. VII, cap. 3, he places this contemplation before every human
etiam gubernationi Reipublicæ, et ideo 5, Metaphysicæ, cap. 2, action, even before the governing of the republic. And for that reason in
sapientiam laudat, et præfert omnibus, et libr. 12, cap. 7, dicit, Metaph. V, cap. 2, he praises wisdom and places it before everything else
Deum contemplatione sui esse beatum, nos vero quando illi, and in XII, cap. 7, he says that God is happy in contemplation of himself
30 ut possumus, similes efficimur. Hanc sententiam secutus est 30R but we [are happy] when we make ourselves similar to him insofar as we
D. Thomas 1, 2, quæst. 3, art. 5, et quæst. 4, art. 3, et 1 part., can. St. Thomas follows this view in [ST ] IaIIæ.3.5 and 4.3; [ST ] Ia.62.1
quæst. 62, art. 1 et 64, art. 1, ad 1, idem 3, cont. Gent., cap. 44, and 64.1 ad 1; SCG III, cap. 44; Sent. III, dist. 29, q. 2; and in explaining
Eius ratio 1. et in 3, dist. 29, quæst. 2, et exponendo Aristotelem. Cujus ra- Aristotle. The reasons for this are, first, because contemplation is of itself The first reason
for it.	tiones sunt primo, quia contemplatio est de se diuturnior, mag- longer-lasting and more everlasting, for it is more immaterial and lacks
35 isque perpetua, est enim immaterialior, et carens contrario. Se- 35R a contrary. Secondly, because it is per se more sufficient than the other The second.
Secunda. cundo, quia est per se sufficiens magis quam cætera, quia propter things, because it is sought for its own sake and not for the sake of an-
se quæritur, et non propter aliud, et quia paucissimis adiumen- other and because it needs very little assistance. Thirdly, because it is an The third.
Tertia. tis eget. Tertio, quia est operatio maxime operabilis, quia est especially performable action, because it is especially in harmony with a
maxime consentanea naturæ secundum gradum supremum ejus. nature according to its highest grade. Whence there is a fourth reason: The fourth.
40	Quarta. Unde est quarta ratio, quia est perfectissima operatio, et maxime 40R because it is the most perfect action and especially proper to a human
propria ho- <145> minis, in qua maxime differt a brutis, et cum being, in which he especially differs from brute animals and agrees with
Quinta. Deo, et substantiis immaterialibus convenit. Denique, quia per God and immaterial substances. Finally, because a human being becomes The fifth.
hanc actionem fit homo maxime familiaris Deo. especially intimate to God through this action.
2. Sententia
aliorum.
2. Secunda sententia ait, consistere hanc beatitudinem in 2. The second view says that this happiness consists in a natural love The view of the
others.	45 amore Dei naturali super omnia. Tenet Cano, lib. 9, de Locis, 45R for God beyond all other things. Cano holds [this view] in De Locis
cap. 9, ubi reprehendit Aristotelem, quod omnino fuerit oblitus Theologis IX, cap. 9, where he blames Aristotles for being entirely obliv-
hujus actus, et Scotus 4, dist. 49, quæst. 3, art. 2, qui tamen existi- ious of this act. Scotus also [holds this view] in IV, dist. 49, q. 3, art. 2,
mat Aristotelem sub contemplatione amorem comprehendisse, although he thinks that Aristotle included love under contemplation, be-
quia rationes ejus non magis procedunt de actu intellectus, quam cause his arguments advance no more with respect to an act of intellect
50 voluntatis, ipse quoque existimat voluntatem esse perfectiorem 50R than with respect to an act of will. He likewise thinks that the will is the
Eius
fundamentum.
potentiam: accedit, quod quælibet cognitio naturalis Dei potest more perfect power. He grants that any natural cognition of God can be The view’s
foundation.	esse in peccatore, unde solus amor esse videtur, qui conjungit in a sinner. Hence, it seems to be only love that perfectly unites a human
hominem perfecte cum suo fine ultimo naturali. being with his ultimate natural end.
Resolutio autoris
bimembris.
3. Hæc quæstio, suppositis supra dictis, disp. 6 et 7, de beat- 3. This question can easily be resolved if we assume what was said The author’s
two-part
solution.
55 itudine supernaturali, facile expediri potest. Dicendum est con- 55R above in disp. 6 and 7 about supernatural happiness. Consequently, it
sequenter, hanc beatitudinem consistere in perfectissima natu- should be said that this happiness consists in a most perfect natural union
rali conjunctione cum Deo per intellectum et voluntatem, quan- with God through the intellect and will, insofar as he can be cognized by
tum ex creaturis naturali lumine intellectus cognosci potest. creatures by the natural light of the intellect. We say this is true either of
Quod est verum sive loquamur de homine ex anima, et cor- the human being as composed of soul and body or of the separated soul.
60 pore composite, sive de anima separata; et hoc sequuntur auc- 60R And the authors cited above follow this in parallel. Nor does Scotus
37–38 paucissimis adiumentis eget. Tertio, quia ] om. V.

-- 2 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 3
tores supra citati in simili; neque ab illa discrepat Scotus et Soto, disagree with this. Nor Soto, dist. 49, q. 5, art. 4, concl. 5, and Medina,
dist. 49, quæst. 5, art. 4, conclus. 5, Medina 1, 2, quæst. 3, art. 7, IaIIæ.3.7, who also understand Aristotle in this way, for among other
qui sic etiam Aristotelem intelligunt, nam inter alia dixit, illam things he says that this contemplation brings about wisdom or makes
contemplationem facere sapientem, vel amicum, et carum Deo, one a friend of or beloved to God (EN I, cap. 7, and Pol. VII, cap. 1) and
65 1 Ethic., cap. 7, et 7 Polit., cap. 1, et alibi requirit virtutem animi 65R elsewhere he requires virtue of the soul for happiness.
ad beatitudinem.
Prius membrum
suadetur.
4. Rationes sunt claræ, nam imprimis quod divina cog- 4. The reasons are clear, for, in the first place, the fact that divine The first member
is recommended.	nitio sit necessaria, satis probatur rationibus Aristotelis: item, cognition is necessary is satisfactorily proven by the arguments of Aris-
quia est quædam assecutio supremi boni hominis: item, quia totle. First, because it is a certain comprehension of the highest good for
70 satiat perfectissimum quemdam appetitum, et capacitatem ho- a human being. Also, because it satisfies a certain most perfect human
minis: denique, quia per hunc actum intelligit homo suum ul- 70R desire and capacity. Finally, because a human being understands his ulti-
timum finem, estque non solum propter aliud, sed propter se mate end through this act and it is worth seeking not only for the sake of
Excluditur
quorundam
placitum circa
idem membrum.
expetibilis. Advertendum est, valde errare eos, qui dicunt, hanc something else but for its own sake. It should be noted that they greatly What is pleasing
to some
concerning the
same member is
excluded.
beatitudinem ex parte intellectus consistere in clara visione Dei, err who say that this happiness on the part of the intellect consists in
75 ut est prima causa naturalis, quod interdum videntur insinuare clear vision of God as he is the first natural cause. Those who posit a
qui ponunt naturalem appetitum ad videndum Deum; est enim 75R natural desire for seeing God sometimes seem to suggest this. But this is
hoc omnino falsum, quia illa visio, utcumque consideretur, est entirely false, because that vision—in whatever way it is considered—is
supernaturalis, et non debita naturæ, et posset homo creari supernatural and not owed to nature. And a human being could be cre-
absque ordinatione ad illam consequendam, ut supra, disp. 4, ated without an ordering to the pursuit of that, as was shown above in
80 sect. 3, a num. 3, ostensum est, neque quidquam re- <col. b> disp. 4, sec. 3, from n. 3. Nor can a distinction concerning the vision of
fert distinctio de visione Dei, ut prima causa, vel sub alia ratione, 80R God as first cause or under some other concept refer to anything, because
quia omnis visio Dei est ejusdem rationis, et per eam videtur every vision of God is of the same nature and God is seen through it as
Deus ut in se est, tam ut trinus, quam ut unus, et tam ut auctor he is in himself, as three just as much as one and as author of grace as
gratiæ quam naturæ. much as author of nature.
85	Posterius
membrum unde
suadetur.
5. Altera vero pars de amore mihi videtur certissima propter 5. But the other part concerning love seems most certain to me on Hence the latter
member is
recommended.
rationes factas, num. 2, in quo est maxime notanda differentia 85R account of the reasons given in n. 2, with regard to which the difference
inter supernaturalem et naturalem beatitudinem, quod in super- between supernatural and natural happiness should especially be noted.
naturali visio intellectus necessario secum affert amorem, et ideo In the supernatural [case] vision of the intellect necessarily brings love
non potest ulla ratione sola cognitio dici essentialis beatitudo along with itself and for that reason cognition alone cannot for any rea-
90 integra; quis enim dicat dæmonem esse essentialiter beatum nat- son be called complete, essential happiness. For who says that a demon
urali beatitudine, quia habet perfectam cognitionem naturalem 90R is essentially happy by natural happiness because he has a perfect natural
Dei, cum non habeat amorem? Item potest sic explicari, quia cognition of God when he does not have love? Also, it can be explained
homo et est ens physicum et morale: ergo nisi utraque ratione in this way, because a human being is also a physical and moral being.
sit consummatus, et ultimate perfectus, non potest dici bea- Therefore, unless he is consummate and ultimately perfect in each aspect,
95 tus: quamvis autem per cognitionem in esse physico valde perfi- he cannot be called happy. Moreover, although he is greatly perfected in
ciatur, tamen in esse morali tota ejus perfectio pendet ex amore: 95R physical being through cognition, nevertheless his whole perfection with
ergo maxime pertinet ad beatitudinem essentialem naturalem respect to moral being depends on love. Therefore, it very much belongs
ejus. to his essential natural happiness.

-- 3 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 4
In beatitudine
naturali
simpliciter
præfertur amor.
6. Quæres, quis horum præcipue requiratur in hac beati- 6. You may ask which of there is particularly required in this happi- Strictly speaking,
love is placed first
in natural
happiness.
100 tudine. Omissis opinionibus, supra disput. 7, sect. 1, tractatis, ness. Omitting the opinions discussed above in disp. 7, sect. 1, it seems
mihi videtur utendum distinctione paulo ante insinuata: nam 100R to me that [we] should use the distinction suggested a little earlier. For
si consideretur homo in genere naturæ, et entis physici, præ- if a human being is considered in the genus of nature and of a physi-
cipua pars est cognitio, quia, ut suppono, est perfectus actus, cal being, the principal part is cognition, because it is, as I suppose, the
et supremus perfectissimæ potentiæ, atque adeo perfectissimus supreme and perfect act of the most perfect power and for that reason
105 in genere entis, quod est præcipue verum de anima separata, et the most perfect in the genus of being. This is clearly true of the sepa-
idem est probabile de toto homine, quia cum cognitio Dei, in 105R rated soul and the same is probably [true] of the whole human being,
utroque statu sit abstractiva, et per effectus; forte non est essen- [i] because since cognition of God is abstractive and by means of effects
tialiter diversa, et quia in ordine naturalis beatitudinis homo in in each state, it is perhaps not essentially different [between the states]
hac vita, non tantum considerandus est ut viator, sed ut exis- and [ii] because in relation to natural happiness a human being in this
110 tens in eo statu, in quo naturaliter beatificandus est, quia extra life should not only be considered as a traveler but also as existing in that
hunc statum non potest naturaliter beatificari totus homo, sed 110R state in which he should naturally be made happy, since beyond this state
anima tantum, ut statim dicam, sect. seq., at vero considerando the whole human being cannot naturally be made happy but only his
hominem ut morale agens, præcipua pars beatitudinis ejus est soul as I will show at once in the following section. On the other hand,
amor, quia solus ille est efficax principium honestatis, et rec- however, considering a human being as a moral agent, the principal part
115 titudinis in humanis operationibus, quod non habet specula- of his happiness is love, because love alone is the effective principle of
tio naturalis. Unde si altera ex his operationibus eligenda es- 115R honestas and rectitude in human actions, which natural speculation does
set, præferendus esset amor, quia revera est magis necessarius not have. Hence, if one of these actions must be elected, love should
ad bonitatem et honestatem simpliciter, et non est infallibiliter be placed first, because, strictly speaking, it really is more necessary for
conjunctus cum illa cognitione, unde etiam fit, ut magis per- goodness and honestas. And it is not infallibly conjoined with that cogni-
120 tineat ad amorem Dei propter se. <146> tion, as a result of which it also happens that it belongs more to the love
120R of God for his own sake.
Vera cognitio,
speculativane, an
practica
præferatur ad
beatitudinem
naturalem.
7. Hinc facile constat quænam cognitio naturalis maxime 7. From here it is easily clear which natural cognition—specula- Whether
speculative or
practical true
cognition is
placed first for
natural
happiness.
ad beatitudinem pertineat, speculativa, an practica. Aristoteles tive or practical—especially belongs to happiness. For Aristotle and
enim et D. Thomas, speculativam maxime requirunt; quod pro- St. Thomas require especially speculative [cognition], which results
cedit considerato homine in esse naturæ; tamen in ordine ad from having considered humans as beings of nature. Nevertheless, in
125 mores maxime necessaria est cognitio practica, etsi non sit ex- 125R the moral order practical cognition is especially necessary, even if spec-
cludenda speculativa, in qua practica fundatur, imo ipsa practica ulative [cognition]—in which practical [cognition] is grounded—should
cognitio quamvis necessaria sit, non tamen proprie propter se, not be excluded. Indeed, although practical cognition itself is necessary,
et ut pars beatitudinis, sed ut conditio ad amorem requisita. it is not nevertheless properly for its own sake and as a part of happiness,
but as a condition for the requisite love.
8. Ultimo facile constat, quomodo aliæ animi virtutes, vel 130R 8. Lastly, it should be readily clear in what way the other virtues
130 earum operationes ad hanc beatitudinem requirantur. Aristote- of the soul and their actions are required for this happiness. Aristotle
les ait, secundario requiri, quia vere in eis non consistat essen- says that they are required secondarily, because the essence of natural
tia naturalis beatitudinis, sunt tamen vel dispositiones ad eam happiness does not really consist of them. Nevertheless, they are either
prerequisitæ, vel proprietates illam comitantes. Atque idem ju- prerequisite dispositions for it or properties concomitant to it. And the
dicium esse potest de aliis scientiis intellectus: idemque pro- 135R same judgement can be made concerning other sciences of the intellect.

-- 4 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 5
135 portionaliter dicendum de aliis corporis bonis, et fortunæ, quæ And the same should be said analogously of the other goods of body
requiri possunt ut instrumenta, vel media necessaria ad beati- and fortune which can be required as instruments or necessary means
tudinem, non vero proprie ut pars beatitudinis, ut dicam, sec- for happiness, but not properly as a part of happiness, as I will say in
tione sequenti, ubi solvemus difficultates omnes, quæ in doct- the following section where we will resolve all the difficulties which can
rina data possunt occurrere. 140R occur in the given doctrines.
SECTIO II. SECTION II.
Quomodo possit homo acquirere beatitudinem naturalem. In what way a human being can acquire natural happiness.
Suppositio ad
quæstionis
decisionem.
1. Ut intelligatur difficultas hujus quæstionis, quomodo 1. In order for the difficulty of this question—in what way a human The supposition
for a resolution
of the question.
possit homo consequi beatitudinem naturalem, constituamus being can pursue natural happiness—to be understood, we place him in
5 hominem in ordine ad finem ultimum suum conditum in puris 5R relation to his ultimate end put in him in purely natural [ways], that
naturalibus, id est, neque ordinatum ad altiorem finem, quam is, neither ordered to a higher end than is owed to nature nor having in
sit naturæ debitus, neque in se habentem alias facultates, vel himself faculties or virtues other than those which follow on his nature
virtutes præter eas, quæ naturam consequuntur, vel per natu- or which can be acquired through natural acts, neither receiving other
rales actus comparari possunt, neque ex parte Dei recipientem benefits on the part of God nor another kind of providence than is ap-
10 alia beneficia, neque aliud providentiæ genus, quam sit ordini 10R propriate to the order of nature. For in order to understand the proper
naturæ consentaneum, nam ad intelligendam propriam nostræ condition of our nature, it is necessary to prescind from everything that
naturæ conditionem, oportet præscindere omnia quæ supra nat- is beyond nature, which could have been done not only through the in-
uram sunt, quod non solum per intellectum fieri potuit, sed re tellect, but itself could really have been done by God, which is almost as
ipsa potuit fieri a Deo, quod mihi fere tam certum est, quam certain to me as it is certain that all these supernatural goods are purely
15 est certum omnia hæc supernaturalia bona esse mere gratuita, et 15R by grace and in no way owed to our nature.
nullo modo nostræ naturæ debita.
2. Quo posito principio, multiplex oritur difficultas in 2. Once the principle has been posited, a complex difficulty arises It is argued
negatively in the
first place on the
part of the
intellect as long
as it is in the state
of the present
life.
Arguitur negative
imprimis ex parte
intellectus quoad
statum præsentis
vitæ.
præsenti quæstione, quæ sic explicatur, nam si homo potest in the present question. It is explained in this way: for if a human being
consequi beatitudinem naturalem, vel hoc est in statu præsen- can acquire natural happiness, this is either in the state of the present life
20 tis vitæ, vel in statu animæ separatæ, vel in aliquo statu, in quo or in the state of the separated soul or in some state after the first sepa-
post primam separationem iterum anima esset corpori unienda: 20R ration where the soul will again be united with a body. [But] in none of
in nullo horum statuum: ergo nullo modo. De statu præsen- these states. Therefore, [a human being can acquire natural happiness]
tis vitæ probatur variis modis, primo ex parte intellectus, quia in no way. Concerning the state of the present life, it is proven in various
in hac vita vix potest cognitio Dei acquiri, et quamvis ab uno, ways. First, on the part of the intellect, because cognition of God can
25 vel altero possit, non tamen communiter ab hominum mul- hardly be acquired in this life. Even if it could [be acquired] by one or
titudine: beatitudo autem esse debet bonum commune, nam 25R another, still, [it could] not generally [be acquired] by the multitude of
aliæ res naturales ut plurimum consequi possunt suum finem humans. But happiness ought to be the general good, for other natural
in pluribus individuis, cur non humana natura? Rursus, qui things can at most acquire their end in many individuals—why not hu-
possunt aliqualem cognitionem Dei assequi, illam fere semper man nature? On the other hand, those who can achieve some kind of

-- 5 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 6
30 habent admixtam multis opinionibus incertis, et, quod pejus cognition of God, perhaps always have it contaminated with many un-
est, multis erroribus, unde est axioma theologorum, non posse 30R certain opinions and, what is even worse, many errors. Hence, it is an
hominem suis viribus assequi sine errore omnes veritates natu- axiom of the theologians that a human being cannot achieve without er-
2. Arguitur ex
parte voluntatis.
rales, et præsertim divinas. Secundo, ex parte voluntatis multo- ror by his own strength all natural truths and especially divine [truths].
rum opinio est, non posse hominem in pura natura diligere su- Secondly, on the part of the will the opinion of many is that a human Secondly, it is
argued on the
part of the will.
35 per omnia Deum amore proprio benevolentiæ, quia quoad natu- being with a pure nature cannot love God beyond all other things with
rales vires non est potentior homo in pura natura, quam sit nunc 35R a proper benevolent love, since with respect to natural strength a hu-
in natura lapsa, in qua non potest diligere Deum sine gratia. Rur- man being is not more powerful with a pure nature than he now is with
sus licet admittamus posse aliquo modo, tamen certum est non a lapsed nature (in which he cannot love God without grace). On the
posse perseveranter: non est autem beatitudo, quæ non est di- other hand, although we grant that he can in some way, nevertheless it
40	3. Ex parte
appetitus
sensitivi.
uturna. Unde est tertia difficultas ex parte appetitus, ex quo is certain that he cannot steadfastly. But what is not long-lasting is not
fit, ut non possit homo constans ex his contrariis viribus suis 40R happiness. Whence there is a third difficulty on the part of desire, by Thirdly, on the
part of the
sensitive appetite.
vitare omnia peccata, etiam mortalia, et contra legem naturæ: which it happens that a resolute human being—as a result of his contrary
ergo non posset homo sibi relictus non esse miser, quia non pos- forces—cannot avoid all sins, even ones that are mortal and against the
set vitare peccatum mortale, et post illud commissum, non pos- law of nature. Therefore, a human being left to himself could not fail
45 set viribus suis illud a se expellere, nec remissionem illius nat- to be miserable, because he cannot avoid mortal sin. And after he has
uraliter consequi; homo autem existens in peccato, dignus est 45R committed it, he cannot drive it out from himself by his own strength
Ex parte
amissibilitatis cui
subest naturalis
beatitudo.
æterna pœna et miseria. Quarto, hinc fit ut in hac vita neces- nor can he naturally achieve the remission of it. But a human being exist-
sario desit a perfectio necessaria ad beatitudinem, quæ est perpe- ing in sin deserves eternal punishment and misery. Fourthly, it results [Fourthly,] on
the part of the
amissibility to
which natural
happiness is
subject.
tuitas, primum, quia hæc vita non est perpetua; hoc tamen non from this that in this life he is necessarily lacking in the perfection nec-
50 multum urget, satis enim esset si beatitudo duraret quamdiu du- essary for happiness, which is permanence. First, because this life is not
rat vita. Secundo id probatur, qui fere nullus est, nec esse potest 50R permanent. Nevertheless, this does not press very hard, for it would be
per naturam, qui in eo statu toto tempore vitæ perseveret, et sufficient if happiness were to endure as long as life endures. Secondly,
quamvis demus, posse hoc accidere, nullus tamen est, qui de hoc it is proven: there is almost no one (nor can it be through nature), who
possit esse securus, sed semper sub <147> timore cadendi ab perseveres in that state for the whole time of his life and, although we
55 eo statu; quænam ergo erit hæc felicitas, ut omittam, non posse grant that that can happen, nevertheless, there is no one who can be se-
hominem in hac vita habere cætera omnia, quæ ad statum beati- 55R cure concerning this but he will always be in fear of falling from that
tudinis necessaria sunt, quia non posset carere doloribus aliisque state. What, then, will this felicity be? So I disregard that a human be-
miseriis. ing cannot in this life have all the remaining this which are necessary for
the state of happiness, because he cannot be free from sorrows and other
miseries.
Quoad statum
separationis
arguitur etiam
negative primo.
3. De statu animæ separatæ quoad cognitionem habet mi- 60R 3. There is a minor difficulty concerning the state of the separated It is also argued
negatively with
respect to the
state of
separation.
60 norem difficultatem, quia tunc posset per se ipsam evidenter soul with respect to cognition, since it can then evidently cognize God
cognoscere Deum: tamen est difficultas in hoc, quod adhuc illa through it itself. Nevertheless, there is the difficulty in this that thus far
cognitio non satiaret appetitum ejus, nam esset imperfecta; nam that cognition would not satisfy the soul’s desire for it is imperfect. For
Secundo. viso effectu desideramus videre causam etiam in se. Secunda dif- once the vision has been effected we desire also to see the cause in itself. A
ficultas etiam ex parte voluntatis fere eodem modo urget, tum 65R second difficulty on the part of the will might threaten in the same way, Secondly.
65 quia si actus ille amoris superat naturales vires voluntatis con- first because if that act of love overcomes the natural strengths of the will

-- 6 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 7
junctæ corpori, etiam separatæ; quia ejus vires naturales eædem conjoined to the body, then also separated. For its natural strengths are
sunt in utroque statu: tum maxime, quia si homo ex hac vita the same in either state. Also, especially, because if a human being from
non potest decedere sine aversione ab ultimo fine, manebit nec- this life cannot die without turning from the ultimate end, that turning
essario illa aversio in anima separata, quam non poterit per nat- 70R away will necessarily remain in the separated soul which will not be able
70 urales vires a se expellere, neque cum illa poterit esse beata. Ter- drive it out by itself through natural strength. Nor will it be able to be
Tertio. tio est specialis difficultas, quia naturali appetitui non satisfit per happy with it. There is a third special difficulty because a natural desire is Thirdly.
solum felicem statum animæ separatæ, nisi totus homo beatifice- not satisfied through a felicitous state of the separated soul alone, unless
tur, quia aliæ res omnes non perveniunt ad suos fines in una, vel the entire human being is made happy. For not all other things come to
altera parte, sed in tota natura, et quia ad providentiam auctoris 75R his ends in one or another part but rather in his whole nature. And since
75 naturæ pertinet ut totus homo, qui bene vel male operator, bea- he belongs to the providence of the author of nature as a whole human
tus fiat vel miser. being, he who will act well or badly, will be made happy or miserable.
Quoad statum
reunionis
arguitur.
4. De statu tandem reunionis habet ille certe primam et 4. Concerning the state of final reunion, it also certainly has the first It is argued with
respect to the
state of reunion.
secundam difficultatem supra positam, et aliam propriam, quia and second difficulties posited above and another one of its own. For
ille status supponit resurrectionem hominis, quæ nec naturalis 80R that state assumes the resurrection of the human being which is neither
80 est, nec naturæ debita, et præterea illa admissa quærendum su- natural nor owed to nature. And in addition, once that has been granted,
perest, quale esset corpus, ad quod esset anima reditura: quia si one still needs to ask what kind of body it would be to which the soul
esset tale, quale nunc habemus, redeunt difficultates positæ in will return. For if it is of such a kind as we have now, the difficulties
primo membro, et præterea semper futuri essemus in quodam posited for the first member return and, in addition, we will in the future
perpetuo circulo mortis et resurrectionis; si vero esset alterius 85R always be in a sort of perpetual circle of death and resurrection. But
85 conditionis, jam esset præter debitum naturæ: nullo ergo modo if it is of another condition, then it is already beyond what is owed to
intelligi potest homo beatus in pura natura. Ut respondeamus, nature. Therefore, in no way can a human being be understood to be
supponamus quod alibi dixi, aliud esse loqui de facultate prox- happy in pure nature. In order that we may respond, we assume what
ima ad eliciendos actus, in quibus consistit beatitudo, aliud de we said elsewhere, namely, that it is one thing to speak of the proximate
facultate ad exequenda omnia media, vel tollenda omnia imped- 90R faculty for eliciting the acts in which happiness consists and another [to
90 imenta beatitudinis. speak] of the faculty for carrying out all the means or removing all the
impediments to happiness.
1. Assertio. 5. Dicendum primo, homi- <col. b> nem ex natura sua 5. It should be said first that a human being by his nature has a 1. Assertion.
habere facultatem per se sufficientem ad eliciendum illos actus, faculty that is in itself sufficient for eliciting those acts in which happi-
in quibus consistit beatitudo. Sic D. Thomas, 1, 2, q. 5, art. 5, 95R ness consists. St. Thomas says this in [ST ] IaIIæ.5.5 for calls this natural
nam hanc beatitudinem naturalem vocat beatitudinem imper- happiness imperfect happiness and in this sense he says that it can be ac-
95 fectam, et hoc sensu dicit, posse viribus naturæ acquiri. Pro- quired through the strength of nature. It is proven because it is certain It is proven with
respect to the act
of intellect.
Probatur quoad
actum intellectus.
batur, quia certum est, hominem viribus naturæ posse consequi that a human being through the strength of nature can achieve some true
aliquam veram Dei cognitionem, ut 1 part., quæst. 2 et 12, dici- cognition of God, as is said in I, q. 2 and 12, and is clear from experience.
tur, et constat experientia; quod vero hæc cognitio sufficiat, non 100R But that this true cognition suffices—the difficulties posited in n. 2 not
Item quoad
actum voluntatis.
obstantibus difficultatibus, n. 2, positis, infra patebit. Rursus de standing in the way—will be clear below. Concerning the act of benevo- Likewise with
respect to the act
of will.
100 actu amoris benevolentiæ, et super omnia Dei auctoris naturæ, lent love and beyond all else of God as the author of nature, it is certain
mihi certum est (et nescio an aliquis hoc negaverit) esse in vol- to me (and I do not know whether anyone has denied this) that there is in
untate humana per se, et secundum naturam suam consideratam the will of a human being through itself and considered according to his

-- 7 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 8
vim, et efficaciam naturalem sufficientem ad eliciendum illum 105R nature natural power and efficacy sufficient for eliciting that act. In fact,
actum, ideo enim omnes fatentur hominem in statu innocentiæ for this reason everyone acknowledges that in the state of innocence one
105 potuisse viribus naturæ elicere talem actum, et idem concedunt could by the strength of his nature elicit such an act. And they concede
de Angelis: et eadem ratio est de anima separata. Ex quo aperte likewise concerning the angels. And the argument is the same for the sep-
concluditur voluntatem per se esse ad hoc potentem, ut probat arated soul. From this it is obviously concluded that the will is through
ratio facta, quia voluntas in quocumque statu est eadem omnino 110R itself capable of this, as the argument made above proves, because the will
quoad naturam intrinsecam et vires naturales: quod si aliqui do- in whatever state is entirely the same with respect to its intrinsic nature
110 cent in statu naturæ lapsæ non posse elicere hunc actum, non and natural strength. If some teach that in the state of lapsed nature one
est ex defectu virtutis activæ per se, sed ex impedimentis, scilicet cannot elicit this act, that it is not from a lack of active strength per se
quia illa virtus in hoc statu ita est impedita, ut non possit tam but from impediments—namely, because that strength is impeded in this
perfectum actum perficere: quod an consequenter dicatur, alibi 115R state in such a way that it cannot complete such a perfect act—whether
dicendum est: nunc nobis sufficit, quod facultas per se, et in- this is consequently said, it should be discussed elsewhere. For not it is
115 trinseca non deest. Et ratio est, quia ille actus non est in sua sub- enough for us that the per se and intrinsic faculty is not lacking. And
stantia supernaturalis, nec regulatur, nisi ratione naturali: ergo the reason is because that act is not supernatural in its substance nor is it
Denique
generaliter quoad
actus in quibus
stat ratio
beatitudinis.
facultas per se elicitiva illius est etiam naturalis. Tandem in hoc regulated except by natural reason. Therefore, the faculty per se elicitive
differt naturalis beatitudo a supernaturali, quod illa consistit in 120R of it is also natural. Finally, natural happiness differs from supernatural Finally, generally
with respect to
the acts in which
the nature of
happiness stands.
actibus, ad quos natura dedit facultatem, et capacitatem in suo happiness in that it consists in acts for which nature provides a faculty
120 ordine proportionatam, ut colligitur ex D. Thoma, 1, 2, q. 109, and capacity proportionate in its order, as is gathered from St. Thomas
ad ult., et 1 p., q. 23, et 62, a. 1, et hac ratione dicemus infra, in [ST ] IaIIæ.109 ad ult. and I, q. 23 and 62, a. 1. And for this reason
disp. seq., esse in homine appetitum ad naturalem beatitudinem, we will say below in the following disputation that there is in a human
non vero ad supernaturalem: ergo si aliqua est in homine natu- 125R being a desire for natural happiness but not for supernatural happiness.
ralis beatitudo, necesse est ut sit naturalis facultas in homine ad Therefore, if there somehow is natural happiness in a human being, it is
125 eliciendas illas actiones, in quibus consistit. necessary that there be a natural faculty in the human being for eliciting
those actions in which it consists.
2. Assertio
probatur
multipliciter.
Primo.
6. Dicendum secundo: Possibile est hominem consequi 6. It should be said secondly: it is possible the a human being achieve 2. The assertion
is multiply
proven.
First.
hanc beatitudinem naturalem per media naturæ proportionata 130R this natural happiness through means proportionate to and appropriate
et consentanea. Hæc conclusio probari potest primo rationibus for his nature. This conclusion can first be proven by the common no-
communibus, quod media esse debent propor- <148> tionata tions that means ought to be proportionate to the end, for from here
130 fini, hinc enim colligimus ad supernaturalem beatitudinem asse- we gather that supernatural means are necessary for gaining supernatu-
Secundo. quendam necessaria esse supernaturalia media. Item, quia natura ral happiness. Also, because nature does not incline to an end except Second.
non inclinat ad finem nisi per sufficientia media: neque auctor 135R through sufficient means. The author of nature does not institute or
naturæ unum instituit, seu ordinat nisi per aliud, quia esset valde ordain the one except through another, because providence would be
Tertio. diminuta providentia. Item quia omnes aliæ naturæ creatæ pos- greatly diminished. Also, because all other created natures can gain their Third.
135 sunt assequi suos fines naturales per media consentanea naturæ; natural ends through means appropriate to their natures. Therefore, why
Quarto. cur ergo natura humana erit in hoc pejoris conditionis? Denique would human nature be in this worse condition? Finally, all philoso- Fourth.
hoc videntur supposuisse omnes philosophi, qui de beatitudine 140R phers who have disputed concerning happiness seem to have supposed
disputaverunt; tamen in particulari hoc melius probabitur, et this. Still, this in particular will be better proven and shown by satisfy-
declarabitur satisfaciendo difficultatibus initio positis. ing the difficulties posited in the beginning.

-- 8 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 9
140	Expediuntur
difficultates in
n. 4.
7. Primo igitur ex tribus statibus ibi consideratis, tertius, 7. First, therefore, of the three states that were considered here, the The difficulties in
n. 4 are resolved.	positus n. 4, relinquendus est, non enim existimo illum per- third posited in n. 4 should be disregarded, for I do not think that it
tinere ad ordinem naturæ, ut recte probant rationes ibi insinu- 145R pertains to the order of nature, as the arguments suggested here and dis-
ate, et latius disputatum est in materia de Resurrectione, 3 p., cussed more broadly in the material on the resurrection in III, tom. 2,
tom. 2, disp. 7, sect. 7. Nec obstat specialis difficultas ibi insin- disp. 7, sect. 7, rightly proves. Nor does the special difficulty suggested
145 uata, quia non est necesse ut homo possit consequi aliter suum here pose a problem, since it is not necessary that a human being can
finem, quam potest existere, nulla enim res naturalis aliud postu- achieve his end otherwise than if he can exist. For no natural thing de-
lat, nisi quod dum existit possit suum finem consequi: sicut ergo 150R mans another except that as long as it exists it can achieve its end. There-
homo secundum naturam integram corruptibilis est, secundum fore, just as a human being according to his integrated nature is corrupt-
animam vero est immortalis et æternus, ita satis est, quod pro ible but according to his soul is immortal and eternal, so also it is enough
150 aliquo tempore possit naturaliter esse beatus in toto composito, that he can naturally be happy for some time as a composite whole but
perpetuo vero solum in anima. perpetually only in the soul.
Quid de
beatitudine
priorum duorum
statuum senserint
Philosophi.
8. Circa alios vero duos status videtur esse controversia in- 155R 8. But there seems to be a controversy among the ancient philoso- What the
philosophers
thought about
the happiness of
the prior two
states.
ter antiquos philosophes: nam Aristoteles, 1, Ethic., cap. 10, sig- phers concerning the other two states. For Aristotle in EN I, c. 10, indi-
nificat naturalem beatitudinem in hac vita esse comparandam, cates that natural happiness should be secured in this life and he ridicules
155 et irridet Solonem eo quod dicit, beatitudinem solum contin- Solon for saying that happiness only comes to a human after death. But
gere homini post mortem: at vero Plato, in Cratil. et Phæ- Plato, on the other hand, in Crat. and Phaedo, asserted the contrary: that
don., e contrario asseruit, beatitudinem reservari in sæculum 160R happiness is reserved for the future age. As a result, Clement of Alexan-
futurum; ex quo Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 5 Stromat., circa dria in Stromata V, near the beginning, reports these words: “‘I do not
princ., hæc refert verba: Non dico fieri posse, ut omnes homines say that it can happen that all humans are happy beyond a few—as long
160 sint beati præterquam pauci, donec vixero, bona autem spes est fere as I live, but there is good hope that afterwards perhaps I will exceed
ut postquam excessero omnia consequar. Et in eadem sententia everything that I pursue.”’ And Tullius has the same view in De fin., as
est Tullius, lib. de Finib., et alii, quos refert Eugubinus, l. 10, 165R well as others to whom Agostino Steuco refers in book X, c. 11, where
cap. 11, ubi reprehendit Aristotelem, quod oblitus fuerit vitæ he accuses Aristotle of forgetting that there will be a future life. But I do
futuræ: sed non existimo Aristotelem in hoc errasse. Dicendum not think that Aristotle erred in this. Therefore, it should be said that
165 est ergo, utrumque esse aliquo modo verum, nam, ut paulo ante each [position] is true in some way, for, as I was saying a little earlier, a
dicebam, homo in unoquoque statu eo modo, quo <col. b> est, human being can be joined with his ultimate end in each state in that way
potest conjungi suo ultimo fini, in quo consistit essentialis beat- 170R in which he is, in which essential happiness consists. Also, it is proven
itudo. Item probatur illa ratione, quia non solum pars hominis, by the argument that because not only a part of the human being but
sed homo ordinatur ad beatitudinem naturalem: ergo oportet the [whole] human being is ordained to natural happiness. Therefore,
170 ut non solum anima, sed etiam homo possit aliquo modo be- it must not be only the soul. But the human being can also be made
atificari: et hoc est quod intendit Aristoteles, qui addit 1, Eth., happy in some way. And this is what Aristotle intended. He adds in EN
cap. 7, hominem non posse beatificari quo homo est, sed quo est 175R I, c. 7, that a human being cannot be made happy by that which is hu-
in ipso divinius, et ideo, inquit, conandum esse, ut homo se ipsum man but by that in him which is more divine. ‘And therefore’, he says, ‘a
perficiat secundum id, quod in ipso divinius est, id est, non tantum human being should attempt to perfect himself according to that which
175 secundum id, quod est mortale, sed secundum id etiam, quod is more divine in himself’. That is, not only according to that which
immortale est: quia vero pro statu hujus vitæ nulla naturalis is mortal, but also according to that which is immortal. But because in
beatitudo esse potest non admixta variis imperfectionibus et in- 180R the state of this life there can be no natural happiness that is not mixed

-- 9 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 10
commodis, ideo ait Aristoteles beatificari hominem hic, tamen with various imperfections and disadvantages, Aristotle for that reason
ut hominem: quia vero anima separata erit liberior ab omnibus says that a human being can be made happy here only insofar as he is
180 his incommodis, quæ corpus consequuntur; ideo alii philosophi human. But because the separated soul will be freer from all these disad-
reservari dicebant beatitudinem ad illum statum, et præsentem vantages which follow the body, other philosophers for this reason said
vitam solum esse veluti viam quamdam ad illum statum con- 185R that happiness is reserved for that state and that the present life is only
sequendum, quod Aristoteles non negavit, sed addidit hic esse as a kind of road to achieving that state. Aristotle did not deny this, but
aliqualem beatitudinis modum, atque hinc soluta relinquitur se- added that this is some mode of happiness. And from this having been
185 cunda difficultas in secundo membro seu statu posita, in num. 3. resolved, the second difficulty in the second member or state posited in
aliæ duæ communes erant cum aliis positis, num. 2, in primo n. 3 is left behind. But the other two [difficulties] were common with
membro, sive statu. 190R the others posited in n. 2 for the first member of state.
Ad difficultates
in n. 2 generatim.
9. Ad quas primo in genere dici potest, hominem quidem 9. In those one can first say in general that a human being does in- In response to the
difficulties in n. 2
generally.
habere in se intrinsecas facultates per se sufficientes ad conse- deed have in himself intrinsic faculties that are per se sufficient for achiev-
190 quendam beatitudinem naturalem, et exercendo actus, qui sunt ing natural happiness and for exercising the acts which are the means to
media ad illam, et hoc satis esse ut hoc dicatur possibile possi- it. And this is enough for this to be called possible by physical possi-
bilitate physica. Quod vero impedimenta extrinseca tantam ho- 195R bility. But if it is the case that an extrinsic impediment forces so great
mini difficultatem ingerant, ut moraliter non possit semper uti a difficulty on the human being that he cannot always morally use the
ea facultate physica, et accidentarium, et extrinsecum est, prove- physical faculty, it is both accidental and extrinsic, arising from a cer-
195 niens ex quadam mirabili compositione, quæ est in homine tain marvelous composition, which is in the human as a result of natures
ex naturis adeo distantibus, ut sunt caro et spiritus, et ex ap- to that extent distant, as flesh and spirit are, and from contrary desires.
petibus contrariis, quam imperfectionem non tenetur auctor 200R The author of nature is not bound to remove this imperfection. Next,
naturæ auferre. Deinde hinc fit, quod licet gratis daremus, nul- it results henceforth that although we freely grant that no human being
lum hominem naturæ suæ relictum assecuturum de facto beati- having forsaken his nature will in fact achieve natural happiness, it does
200 tudinem naturalem, non inde fieret aut ipsam in se esse impossi- not thereby result either that it in itself is naturally impossible nor that
bilem naturaliter, aut media non esse naturæ proportionata: sed the means [to it] are not proportionate to his nature. But it only follows
solum sequitur hanc naturam tot esse implicatam obstaculis, ut 205R that this nature is entangled with so many obstacles that it is not morally
moraliter non valeat omnia vitare: sed quia hæc non satisfaci- strong enough to avoid all [of them]. But since these are not satisfac-
unt, quando videtur pertinere ad providentiam auctoris naturæ, tory, since they pertain to the providence of the author of nature, as he
205 ut ita provideat, et subveniat defectibus rerum naturalium, ut thus assists and provides for the defects of natural things so that they can
<149> possint assequi suos fines, ideo aliquid amplius est ad achieve their ends, therefore something more needs to be said in response
singulas difficultates dicendum. 210R to each difficulty.
Ad primam
speciatim.
10. Ad primam de cognitione respondetur, veram Dei cog- 10. It is responded to the first [difficulty] concerning cognition that To the first in
particular.	nitionem naturalem esse ita possibilem homini, ut multi illam true natural cognition of God is possible for a human being in such a way
210 assequantur, nec necesse est ut in hac vita omnes possint vacare that many attain it. Nor is it necessary that in this life everyone can be
huic speculationi, et scientiæ naturali, sed satis est ut possint free for this speculation and natural knowledge, but it is sufficient that
aliquo modo cognoscere Deum esse, et quod possint se, et om- 215R they can in some way cognize that God is and that they can refer them-
nia illa in illum, ut in ultimum finem referre. Neque etiam selves and all other things to him as to an ultimate end. It should also not
est mirandum, quod hoc ipsum raro, et in paucioribus contin- surprise us that this happens rarely and in fewer cases, since this is the
215 gat, quia hæc est conditio, et imperfectio humanæ naturæ, et condition and imperfection of human nature and since this depends on

-- 10 of 11 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 15 11
quia hoc pendet ex libertate; undo fit, ut etiam beatitudinem su- freedom. Hence it also happens that few achieve supernatural happiness
pernaturalem pauci assequantur, et inter Angelos multæ species 220R and among the angels many species lack their happiness. There was a To the second.
Ad secundam. caruerunt sua beatitudine. Ad secundam de amore jam respon- response to the first part of the second [difficulty] concerning the love
sum est ad priorem partem ejus: altera vero pars de perseverante now. But the other part concerning persevering love coincides with the
220 amore coincidit cum difficultate tertia. third difficulty.
Ad tertiam
responsio 1.
11. Ad quam dicitur primo quod qui ex hac vita decederent 11. To this it is said first that those who pass from this life before The first response
to the third
[difficulty.]
The second
response.
ante usum rationis, statim assequerentur in alia naturalem beati- 225R the use of reason at once attain natural happiness in the other [life]. Sec-
Responsio 2. tudinem. Secundo, qui brevi tempore ratione uterentur, possent ondly, those who use reason for a brief time can morally preserve them-
moraliter se conservare sine peccato, quia hoc possibile est tem- selves without sin since this is possible for a brief time even for a human
225 pore brevi, etiam homini lapso, et in puris naturalibus, fortasse in a lapsed state and in purely natural [states]. Perhaps it can happen
id posset fieri aliquantulum longiori tempore, non quia intrin- for a slightly longer time, not because the intrinsic composition and im-
seca compositio, et impedimenta, quæ inde proveniunt, essent 230R pediments which arise thenceforth would be different but because the
alia, sed quia impedimenta extrinseca essent minora, nam in eo extrinsic impediments would be lesser. For in that state the attack of the
statu non est consideranda impugnatio dæmonis, ad providen- devil should not be considered, for it belongs to the providence of God
230 tiam enim Dei pertinet ut hanc non permittat, nisi dando suffi- not to permit this except when giving sufficient grace to overcome it.
cientem gratiam ad illam superandam. Ablata autem illa dæmo- Moreover, once the fight with the devil has been removed, many other
nis pugna, multa alia impedimenta auferentur, quæ ex illa sequ- 235R impediments are removed which follow from it. Thirdly, it is probable The third
response.	Responsio 3. untur. Tertio, est probabile Deum daturum fuisse homini in eo that God was about to give some kind of providence to a human being in
statu aliquod providentiæ genus, quo et moraliter posset conser- that state by which he could morally preserve [himself] without falling,
235 vari sine lapsu, præsertim mortali, et quo etiam obtineret remis- especially mortally, and by which he would also obtain remission for his
sionem peccati, si quantum in se est, faceret, vel se converteret sin, if insofar as he is concerned brought or turned himself to God by a
in Deum amore naturali super omnia, quia sine hoc genere prov- 240R natural love beyond all else. For without this kind of providence a hu-
identiæ vix posset homo non esse miser: hæc autem providentia man being can hardly fail to be miserable. But this providence would not
non esset debita homini, proprie loquendo, sed esset ex quadam be owed to a human, properly speaking, but would come from a certain
240 liberalitate Dei, quam, ut ita dicam, Deus sibi ipsi deberet, id liberality of God, which, if I may speak in this way, God would owe to
est, suæ providentiæ et sapientiæ, ac bonitati: differret autem a himself, that is, to his providence and wisdom and goodness. Moreover,
providentia gratiæ in hoc, quod per eam non elevaretur homo ad 245R it differs from the providence of grace in that the human being is not
finem, vel media supernaturalia, sed tantum tollerentur imped- thereby lifted up to his end or supernatural means; rather, only the im-
imenta, ut posset bene naturaliter operari: melius autem Deus pediments are removed so that he can naturally act well. But God better
245 homini providit, et omnes difficultates abstulit, <col. b> gra- provided for humans and removed all difficulties by confering grace and
tiam et supernaturalia dona illi conferendo. supernatural gifts on them.
237 quia ] qui V.

-- 11 of 11 --
