Sydney Penner
Last revised: Feb. 20, 2008
Francisco Su´arez, S. J.
DE VOLUNTARIO ET INVOLUNTARIO DISP. 8, SECT. 41
<262>
WHETHER AN ACT OF CHOICE IS FREE (Utrum actus electionis sit liber)
I suppose that after the intention and with deliberation having been completed that some-
times one means is discovered and sometimes multiple means and that these are either
equally or not equally good for attaining the end.
Suppono post intentionem et facto consilio aliquando reperiri unum medium,
interdum plura : et hæc vel æque, vel inæqualiter bona ad finem.
1. The first view, therefore, is the one which affirms that every choice if free, even with
a posited intention and a single means. The nominalists think this. The reason is that
nothing thereupon occurs that would impose necessity. For it ought to be the intention
itself, which, nevertheless, when it is a free act, cannot be necessitated. It is confirmed
first by examples. For if someone by an absolute will wishes to give alms and cannot
do so except through theft, he does not by necessity choose such a means. Similarly,
he who wills to pursue happiness does not by necessity keep the commandments. It is
confirmed, second, from disagreeableness: otherwise, there would be no merit in choice
once an absolute intention had been posited, just as an exterior act has no merit when it
follows by necessity from an intention. Therefore, etc.
Est ergo prima sententia, quæ affirmat omnem electionem esse liberam, etiam
posita intentione et unico medio. Ita tenent Nominales. Ratio est, quod nihil
tunc occurrat, quod inferat necessitatem : nam deberet esse intentio ipsa : quæ
tamen cum sit actus liber, non potest necessitare. Confirmatur primo exemplis,
nam si quis voluntate absoluta velit facere eleemosynam, et non possit nisi per
furtum, non necessario eligit tale medium. Similiter qui vult consequi felici-
tatem, non necessario servat mandata. Secundo confirmatur ab inconvenienti
: alias posita intentione absoluta, nullum esset meritum in electione : sicut
quando actus exterior necessario sequitur ex intentione : non habet meritum :
ergo, etc.
2. The second view.—The second view affirms that the choice is necessary if only a single
means exists. Choice is free only with the existence of multiple means, to the extent that
1Latin text is from the Viv`es edition.

-- 1 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 2
the will can apply the intellect so that it searches for more reasons of agreeability and
utility in one means than in another. If the intellect finds this [greater agreeability and
utility] and judges it to be in one means, then the will by necessity chooses that means. If
the intellect judges the means to be equal, then the will would not be able to move to either
of them. St. Thomas indicates this view in [ST IaIIæ.13.6 ad 3. Cajetan [also] here. The
foundation is that freedom of the will arises from indifference of the intellect. Therefore,
once the determination of the intellect has been made and the posited judgement that this
is more useful has been demonstrated, the will cannot not will. It is confirmed because
since the will is a blind power, it ought to be ruled by the judgement of the intellect.
Otherwise, judgement and deliberation would be useless and not reason could be given
for why the will loves this and not that. This is the view of Durandus in 2, 2, d. 24, q. 3,
who says rather that choice insofar as it is from the will is not free, but all the freedom is
in the judgement. For the intellect, he says, can be free to judge this to be choiceworthy
or that, to which judgement the will consents by necessity.
Secunda sententia.—Secunda sententia affirmat existente unico medio electio-
nem esse necessariam : tamen existentibus pluribus solum esse liberam, qua-
tenus voluntas potest applicare intellectum, ut inquirat plures ratio- <col. b>
nes convenientiæ et utilitatis in uno medio, quam in alio : quas intellectus si
inveniat, et judicet esse in uno medio, voluntas necessario eligit illud. Quod
si intellectus æque judicet de utroque medio, voluntas in neutrum eorum po-
terit moveri. Hanc sententiam indicat divas Thomas 1, 2, quæst. 13, art. 6,
ad 3, Cajetanus ibi. Fundamentum est, quia libertas voluntate oritur ex in-
differentia intellectus : ergo facta determinatione intellectus, et posito judicio
demonstrante, hoc esse utilius, voluntas non potest non velle. Confirmatur
quia cum voluntas sit potentia cæca, debet regi judicio intellectus : alias judi-
cium et consilium essent inutilia, et nulla posset reddi ratio, cur voluntas hoc
amaret et non illud. Hæc sententia est Durandi, in 2, 2, d. 24, quæst. 3, qui
potius dicit, electionem prout est a voluntate, non esse liberam, sed totam lib-
ertatem esse in judicio : nam intellectus, inquit, libere potest judicare hoc esse
eligendum, vel illud, cui judicio necessario consentit voluntas.
3. First assertion.—I say first: It is certain by faith that a human being is free in choices. For
it is of the faith that a human being acts freely. Moreover, choices especially are human
actions and maximally human, because they turn more on contingencies and depend
more on the deliberation and reason of a human being. Therefore, etc. Hence, in Ecclus.
15[:14] is called especially free because ‘he was left in the hand of his deliberation’. And
immediately the examples concerning means are brought in, which a human being can
freely use. But I leave aside the heresies which are overcome by this conclusion: see disp.
1, sect. 2 and the book De Gratia.
Prima assertio.—Dico primo. Certum est de fide, hominem esse liberum in
electionibus. Nam de fide est, hominem libere operari : præcipuæ autem op-
erationes hominis, et maxime humanæ, sunt electiones, quia magis versantur

-- 2 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 3
circa contingentia et magis ex consilio et ratione hominis pendent : ergo, etc.
Unde Eccles. 15, homo liber maxime dicitur, quia relictus est in manu consilii
sui. Et statim adhibentur exempla de mediis, quibus potest homo libere uti.
Hæreses vero, quæ ex hac conclusione evincuntur, omitto : vide in tr. 2, disp.
1, sect. 2, et libr. de Gratia.
4. Second assertion.—I say secondly: when there is one means only to the end, the choice is
free to the extent that it is in the power of the will to remove the intention. Nevertheless,
if the intention is effective and it perseveres, the choice follows by necessity. [This view] is
common to St. Thomas in the passage cited above ad 1 and 10.2 ad 3 and Aristotle in DA
3, text. 47 and 48, and it can also be gathered from John 14[:21]: ‘He who loves me, will
keep my commandments.’2 And the reason is that an absolute will, if it can, does what it
wills. Because if it can and does not, it is certainly not on account of something other than
that it does not wish to and because it wishes to follow some end to good effect. And it
can. Therefore it does. Therefore, if it can by only one means, that one will be used. If it
is not used, that is a manifest sign that the will was not effective, etc.
Secunda assertio.—Dico secundo. Quando unum tantum est medium illius
electio in tantum libera est, in quantum est in potestate voluntatis tollere in-
tentionem, tamen si intentio est efficax, et illa perseveret, necessario sequitur
electio. Est communis D. Thomas, supra ad primum, et quæst. 10, art. 2, ad 3,
Aristotelis 3, de Anima, text. 47 et 48, et potest colligi ex Joanne, cap, 14 : Qui
diligit me, mandata mea servabit. Et ratio est, quia voluntas absoluta, si potest,
facit quod vult : quia si potest et non facit, certe non propter aliud quam quia
non vult, et quia efficaciter vult consequi finem : et potest : ergo facit : ergo si
potest, unico medio, illo utitur : quod si non utitur, manifestum signum est,
voluntatem non fuisse efficacem, etc.
5. Note, however, that the necessary means ought to be judged and cognized and the
intellect actually to think about it, because otherwise the will will not be moved. Accord-
ingly, it is necessary that the means be judged necessary here and now for the will to be
moved by necessity here and now. Because if it is judged necessary but only for another
time, the will can postpone choice, even if it persists in that intention. And the reason is
because the will does not undergo necessity except by way of the necessity of the means.
Nota tamen debere medium necessarium judicari et cognosci, et intellectum
actu cogitare de illo : quoniam alias voluntas non mo- <263> vebitur. Itaque
oportet ut voluntas nccessario hic et nunc moveatur, medium hic et nunc ju-
dicari necessarium : quoniam si judicatur necessarium, sed pro alio tempore,
potest voluntas differre electionem, etiamsi persistat in illa intentione. Et ratio
est, quia voluntas non patitur necessitatem, nisi pro modo necessitate medii.
2‘He who holds my commandments and keeps them, he it is who loves me’ (Qui habet mandata mea, et
servat ea: ille est qui diligit me). Cf. v. 15.

-- 3 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 4
6. Nor do the foundations of the first view in n. 1 stand against this. To the argument I
say that this efficacy and necessity comes from the intention. Nor does it imply that an
act of intention is free, because with a free act another act can be conjoined by necessity.
And then it flows from that necessity. With respect to the first confirmation, the induction
is denied. To the first example, say that that will to give alms is not absolute which is
explained by this word ‘I wish’ (volo) but is ‘I would wish’ (vellem). Yet this act, because
it proceeds from the complete disposition to honest good, is esteemed as if it were an
absolute will. To the second example is responded that those sinners do not judge here
and now to be necessarily penitent but at their own time.
To the second confirmation some concede that that choice in itself is not merit but in its
cause, that is, in intention and in perseverance. Because if that intention were an act
entirely necessary, such a choice would have no merit. Therefore it is a sign that the
entire merit consists in that intention. But it is more truly said that that choice is in itself
meritorious, because necessity by supposition does not destroy will, strictly speaking,
because that supposition is in the will nor is it similar to an external act. Because that
proceeds proximately by a power which has no freedom. And therefore the external act is
morally one with the internal act. But it is not like that with choice. And to that concerning
the perseverance of the intention I say that this perseverance of the intention consists in
this that in the present circumstances it wishes to choose rather than to disregard the
intention. And on that account the choice, strictly speaking, is free and in the power of
choosing, but it would not be similar if the intention were entirely and strictly speaking
necessary. Because then it would not be in the power of choosing to disregard it, lest for
choosing it were cognized and this no freedom would remain in the choice.
Neque contra hoc obstant fundamenta primæ sententiæ in numero primo.
Ad rationem dico, hanc efficaciam, et necessitatem provenire ab intentione.
Neque refert, actum intentionis esse liberum : quia cum actu libero potest alius
actus necessario conjungi. Et tunc ab illo necessario manat. Ad primam con-
firmationem negatur inductio. Ad primum exemplum dic, illam voluntatem
dandi eleemosynam non esse absolutam quæ explicatur hac voce volo, sed est
vellem : qui tamen actus, quia procedit ex toto affectu ad bonum honestum, ex-
istimatur ac si esset absoluta voluntas. Ad secundum exemplum respondetur,
peccatorem illum non judicare hic et nunc esse necessariam pœnitentiam, sed
suo tempore. Ad secundam confirmationem aliqui concedunt electionem il-
lam in se non esse meritoriam, sed in causa, id est, in intentione et in persever-
antia : quia si illa intentio esset actus omnino necessarius, electio talis nullum
haberet meritum : ergo signum est, totum meritum consistere in illa inten-
tione. Sed verius dicitur, illam electionem esse in se meritoriam, quia necessi-
tas ex suppositione non tollit voluntatem simpliciter, quia suppositio illa est in
voluntate, neque est simile de actu exteriori : quia ille proxime procedit a po-
tentia, quæ nullam habet libertatem : et ideo actus exterior est unus moraliter
cum interiori, non sic autem electio. Et ad illud de perseverantia intentionis
dico, hanc perseverantiam intentionis in hoc consistere quod hic potius vult
eligere, quam omittere intentionem : et idcirco electio simpliciter est libera et

-- 4 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 5
in potestate eligentis, non vero esset simile, si intentio esset omnino et sim-
pliciter necessaria : quia tunc non esset in potestate eligentis omittere illam :
ne ad eligendum cogeretur, et ita nulla libertas maneret in electione.
7. This difficulty has occurred: for it follows that those who love God by necessity, when
they see him, do everything by necessity, without which that love cannot be conserved.
I say briefly (because the matter is in another place) that frequently the necessity is only
as long as the specification, because the objects do not occur as here and now necessary.
Second, it is not strongly disagreeable that sometimes that act of choice is necessary. Some
freedom can always still remain, because the will can be brought to that means not only
by reason that it is necessary to the end but on account of other aspects of good. And this
is free. Wherefore, etc.
Occurrebat hæc difficultas : nam sequitur, eos qui diligunt necessario Deum,
cum vident illum, operari necessario omnia, sine quibus non potest conservari
ille amor. Dico breviter, quoniam res est alterius loci, frequenter solum esse
necessitatem quoad specificationem, quia non occurrunt objecta tanquam hic
et nunc <col. b> necessaria. Secundo forte inconveniens non est, aliquando
actum illum electionis esse necessarium : semper tamen potest manere aliqua
libertas, quia potest voluntas ferri in illud medium, non ea ratione tantum,
quæ necessaria est ad finem, sed propter alias rationes boni : et hoc liberum
est. Quare, etc.
8. Third assertion.—I say third: when multiple means are by every consideration equally
good, the will can by its freedom choose the one it wishes. This conclusion is common
and is proved first: because in proposing the means the intellect indicates that none of
them separately is necessary. Therefore, it happens that the will for that reason may love
whichever one of them it pleases, because it is good and on account of what it disregards,
namely, because it is not necessary. Therefore, etc. Secondly, it is incredible to say that
then the will remains in suspense. For reason itself leads to choosing in that way. For it
can be noticed that it is irrational not to choose a useful means and be deprived of the end
that is loved merely because there happens to be another means which is good. Thirdly,
freedom of the will is especially apparent in this case. For I ask whether that judgement is
free or necessary. If necessary, freedom is removed. If free, [it is] because of the preceding
free act of will and the same question will return. But neither is what Durandus says
probable, that that judgement is per se free, for since someone not necessarily provides
assent when he assents, therefore he does, because he wills. Just as because he is not
moved by necessity, when he moves because he wills. And therefore, he believes , because
he wills, etc.
Tertia assertio.—Dico tertio. Quando sunt plura media omni ratione æque bo-
na, potest voluntas sua libertate eligere quod voluerit. Conclusio hæc est com-
munis, et probatur primo : quia propositis mediis intellectus indicat, nullum
sigillatim esse necessarium : ergo habet voluntas unde amet quod illorum

-- 5 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 6
placuerit, quia bonum est, et propter quid omittat : scilicet, quia necessarium
non est : ergo, etc. Secundo incredibile est dicere, quod tunc voluntas maneat
suspensa : nam ipsa ratio ducit ad eligendum illo modo, nam advertere potest,
esse irrationabile, medium utile non eligere, et fine amato privari, solum quia
occurrit aliud medium seque bonum. Tertio in hoc maxime casu apparet liber-
tas voluntatis : nam si tunc non potest eligere, semper determinaretur a judicio
intellectus : quo posito eligeret, sed hoc tollit libertatem voluntatis : nam peto,
an illud judicium sit liberum, an necessarium? si necessarium, tollitur libertas
: si liberum, ergo ex præcedenti actu voluntatis libero, et redibit eadem quæs-
tio. Neque vero probabile est, quod Durandus dicit, judicium illud per se esse
liberum, nam cum quis non necessarium præbet assensum, quando assentit,
ideo facit, quia vult : sicut quia non necessario movetur, cum movetur, quia
vult : et idcirco credit, quia vult, etc.
9. Fourth assertion.—I say fourth: when the means are inequal, either materially or for-
mally or in both ways, there is freedom of the will to choose even the lesser good. Nev-
ertheless, the choice is always according to the measure of intention and more frequently,
even almost always, the will chooses under some aspect of greater agreeability. It should
be noted that with means two things can be especially considered. The first is utility with
respect to the end that is as if formal. The second is some proper goodness that is as if
material. Therefore, means can be equally good with respect to the former, but not with
respect to the latter. And these I call materially inequal. And in that case it is clear that the
intention of the end by itself does not incline more to one than to another means. Where-
fore, from this part the choice is free. From elsewhere, however, by a natural propensity
of the will to other goods it happens that that will is more inclined to another good which
is better for whatever reason. Indeed, when this inclination also does not impose neces-
sity, then the will will be able not to grasp that greater aspect of good and therefore to
choose the means that is materially less good. And thus the first part of the conclusion is
clear, which is confirmed: for that greater good, as such, was not loved by choice but by
intention, and yet every intention of this sort is free, as I said above. Therefore.
Quarta assertio.—Dico quarto : quando media sunt inæqualia sive materialiter,
sive formaliter, sive utroque modo, liberum est voluntati eligere etiam minus
bonum : semper tamen electio est juxta mensuram intentionis, et frequentius,
et fere semper eligit voluntas sub aliqua ratione majoris convenientiæ. Notan-
dum in mediis, duo posse præcipue considerari. Primum utilitas ad finem,
quod est quasi formale. Secundum aliqua propria bonitas, quod est quasi ma-
teriale : possunt ergo media esse æque bona priori ratione, non vero posteriori
: et hæc voco materialiter inæqualia : et tunc constat intentionem finis de se
non magis inclinare ad unum, quam ad aliud. Quare ex hac parte libera est
electio : verum aliunde ex naturali propensione voluntatis ad alia bona, fit
ut voluntas magis inclinetur ad aliud bonum, quod est quacumque ratione
me- <264> lius. Verum, cum hæc inclinatio etiam non imponat necessitatem,
poterit tunc voluntas non amplecti illam majorem rationem boni, atque adeo

-- 6 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 7
eligere medium materialiter minus bonum. Et ita patet prima pars conclu-
sionis, quæ confirmatur : nam illud majus bonum, ut sic, non est amatum
electione, sed intentione : atqui omnis hujusmodi intentio est libera ; ut supra
dixi : ergo.
10. It should be noted, second, that it can happen that means as formal means are inequal,
because, of course, the end will be compared to one means, either for nearness in time or
for greater perfection and certainty, and then it is clear that there is freedom for the will
to choose the one it wishes, because there is freedom for it to intend the end either on
behalf of suchnearness or with such perfection. And the reason is because the intention
is the cause of the choice and therefore the choice is measured to that as its cause. And
the conclusion is also confirmed by experience: for if someone were to intend to pursue
an end either for the greatest nearness in time or for the greatest perfection, with respect
to this intention the more useful means would be, strictly speaking, necessary. Therefore,
it will be chosen by necessity. And through this the other two parts of the conclusion are
clear.
The other part is also clear, for certainly, strictly speaking, there is freedom for the will to
choose the means that by every weighing is judged less good overall, because it is neces-
sitated to nothing determinate since none is necessary and it can always throw back the
intention just as it wishes. It is confirmed by experience: for although, strictly speaking,
someone may judge honest good to be better than pleasure, yet he chooses pleasure if he
wants to.
Notandum secundo : contingere posse, media, ut media formalia esse in-
æqualia, quia scilicet uno medio, vel breviori tempore vel majori perfectione,
et certitudine comparabitur finis, et tunc constat liberum esse voluntati eligere
quod voluerit, quia liberum ei est intendere finem aut pro tali tempore, aut
cum tanta perfectione : et ratio est, quia intentio est causa electionis, et ideo
electio commensuratur illi tanquam suæ causæ. Et confirmatur etiam experi-
entia conclusio : nam si quis intenderet consequi finem aut brevissimo tem-
pore, aut summa perfectione, respectu hujus intentionis medium utilius es-
set simpliciter necessarium : ergo necessario eligetur. Et per hæc patent aliæ
duæ partes conclusionis. Patet etiam alia pars, nempe simpliciter esse liberum
voluntati eligere medium, quod omnibus pensatis absolute judicatur minus
bonum, quia ad nullum determinate necessitatur cum nullum sit necessarium,
et semper potest remittere intentionem prout voluerit. Confirmatur experien-
tia : nam quamvis simpliciter quis judicet honestum esse melius delectabili,
eligit delectabile si vult.
11. Regarding the foundation of the second view, I say that freedom arises from reason,
not only because it can judge this to be better than that, but especially because it can
carefully assess the weight of each good. For this reason the will can love in that perfect
way, that is, in that position and way in which the thing itself is lovable. And an example
of this is evident in the freedom of the divine will, which confirms everything which we

-- 7 of 8 --

Su´arez, De voluntario et involuntario disp. 8, sec. 4 8
have said. Because from two equals it chooses what it will not by another reason, unless
because it wants to, and often it chooses what is less useful. Our freedom, moreover is a
participation of that and has the same root with the proportion being kept.
Regarding the confirmation of that view, I deny that the will is determined by the intellect
so that it itself does not also determine itself. Indeed, by the intellect it is determined as
if until sufficiency. But it determines itself until efficacy. Nor is it necessary that another
reason of this determination be given beyond freedom, and because it wills by a sufficient
supposition by a reason on the part of the object. And as far as this concerning the former
part of the title of the present disputation.
Ad fundamentum secundæ sententiæ dico libertatem oriri ex ratione, non
solum quia potest judicare hoc esse melius illo, sed maxime quia potest per-
pendere uniuscujusque boni pondus : propterea potest voluntas illo perfecto
modo amare, id est, eo gradu, et modo, quo ipsum est amabile : et exemplum
hujus evidens est in libertate divinæ voluntatis : quod confirmat omnia quæ
diximus : quoniam ex duobus æqualibus eligit quod vult non alia ratione, nisi
quia vult, et sæpe eligit, quod minus utile est : nostra autem libertas est partici-
patio illius et eamdem radicem habet servata proportione. Ad confirmationem
illius sententiæ nego, voluntatem ita determinari ab intellectu, ut ipsa non se
etiam determinet, imo ab intellectu determinatur, quasi quoad sufficientiam
: ipsa vero se determinat quoad efficaciam : neque oportet aliam rationem
hujus determinationis reddere, præter libertatem, et quia vult supposita suffi-
cienti ratione ex parte ob- <col. b> jecti. Atque hactenus de priori parte tituli
præsentis disputationis.

-- 8 of 8 --
