Last revision: February 22, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 4, SECT. 31
© Sydney Penner 2011
<43, col. b>2
Quotuplex sit beatitudo. What kinds of happiness there are.
Prætermittuntur
diuisiones
quædam.
1. Hanc dubitationem etiam præmitto, quia pertinet ad quæs- 1. I also present this questioning, because it pertains to the question Certain divisions
are ignored.	tionem an est, et fundamentum erit eorum, quæ dicenda sunt, of whether happiness exists and it will be the foundation for the things
et ordinis in hac materia servandi. Omitto autem imprimis di- that remain to be discussed and for the order to be kept in this material.
5 visionem beatitudinis, in veram et falsam, quoniam tantum de 5R I leave aside, however, the first division of happiness into true and false,
vera agimus: et falsa in infinitum multiplicari potest pro libito because we are discussing only true happiness. And false happiness can
humanæ voluntatis. Omitto præterea divisionem beatitudinis be multiplied to infinity through the whims of human will. In addition,
in objectivam et formalem, quia et utraque explicata jam est, I leave aside the division of happiness into objective and formal, both
et ex utraque consurgit unus finis, et una beatitudo. Denique because each has already been explained and because each arises from
10 omitto divisionem beatitudinis in essentialem et accidentalem, 10R one end and one happiness. Finally, I leave aside the division of hap-
quoniam hæc quidem coincidit cum his, quæ diximus de beat- piness into essential and accidental, because this indeed coincides with
itudine vel pro essentia vel pro statu: nam ea, quæ reperiun- these, because we spoke of happiness either through essence of through
tur in statu beatitudinis præter essentiam, possunt dici acci- state. For those things which are found in the state of happiness in ad-
dentia beatitudinis, quamvis in eis sit latitude: nam quædam dition to essence can be called accidents of happiness, although it is in
15 sunt maxime intrinseca, et inseparabilia ab essentiali beatitu- 15R them with latitude. For certain ones are especially intrinsic and insepa-
dine; alia vero sunt magis extrinseca; de quibus omnibus postea rable from essential happiness, but others are more extrinsic, concern-
videbimus. Notandæ igitur sunt tres, vel quatuor divisiones ing all of which we will see later. Three or four divisions, therefore,
præcipuæ. should especially be noted.
1. Divisio
beatitudinis in
naturalem et
supernaturalem.
Fundatur in
D. Thom.
2. Primo dividitur beatitudo in naturalem et supernatu- 2. First, happiness is divided into natural and supernatural. This The first division
of happiness into
natural and
supernatural.
It is grounded in
St. Thomas.
20 ralem. Hac divisione utitur sæpe D. Thomas, 1, p., q. 23, a. 1, 20R division is often used by St. Thomas, who says in [ST ] Ia.23.1 that
dicens: hominem ordinari ad duplicem finem, alterum naturæ a human being is ordered to a twofold end, one proportionate to his
proportionatum, alterum superantem facultatem naturæ; idem nature and the other surpassing the faculty of nature. Moreover, as we
autem est finis ultimus et beatitudo, ut diximus. Item q. 62, said, the ultimate end and happiness are the same thing. Likewise, in
art. 1, distinguit in Angelis hanc duplicem beatitudinem, et Ia.62.1 he distinguishes in the angels this twofold happiness and says
25 dicit, eos fuisse creatos in beatitudine naturali, non vero super- 25R that those creatures were in natural happiness, but not supernatural,
naturali, juxta doctrinam Augustini, libro de Eccl. dogmat. (si according to the teaching of Augustine in libro de Eccl. dogmat. (if that
ejus est opus), capit. 59. Addit vero <44> ibi beatitudinem nat- is his work), c. 59 [i.e., c. 29, al. 59]. But he adds there that natural
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not
always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 3 2
uralem esse quodammodo beatitudinem, vel quia comparata happiness is happiness in a certain way, either because it is imperfect
est ad supernaturalem, est imperfecta, vel propter aliam ra- compared to supernatural [happiness] or on account of another reason,
30 tionem, quam infra subjiciam. Eadem distinctione, agens de 30R which I will present below. St. Thomas uses the same distinction in
hominibus, utitur D. Thomas 1, 2, q. 62, art. 1, in corpore, et discussing human beings in [ST ] IaIIæ.62.1 co. and ad 3; 109.5 ad 3;
ad 3, et q. 109, art. 5, ad 3, et q. 110, art. 3, et optime in 3, dis- 110.3; and best in [Sent.] III, dist. 23, q. 1, art. 4, q. 3. And from this
tinct. 23, quæst. 1, art. 4. quæst. 3, et ex hac divisione colligit division he gathers also the necessity for grace and the division between
etiam necessitatem gratiæ, et divisionem virtutum in infusas, infused and acquired virtues.
35 et acquisitas.
Accedit ratio. 3. Et ratione declaratur: nam imprimis quod sit aliqua 35R 3. And it is shown with this reasoning: for, first, some supernat- Reason is added.
beatitudo hominis supernaturalis simpliciter de fide certum ural happiness for a human being simply is certain by faith, since the
est, quoniam Dei visio, et amor ac fruitio, quæ illam conse- vision, love, and enjoyment of God, which attend it, are supernatural,
quuntur, supernaturalia sunt, ut partim in sequentibus dice- as we will discuss partly in the following sections and is clear partly
40 mus, partim constat ex materia de charitate et gratia. Ex quibus from the material on charity and grace. From these it is also certain
etiam certum est, media, quibus illa beatitudo comparatur, esse 40R that the means by which this happiness is acquired are supernatural.
supernaturalia, resurrectio etiam ad vitam immortalem et glo- Resurrection to immortal life and glory is wholly supernatural. There-
riosam omnino supernaturalis est. Datur ergo beatitudo su- fore, supernatural happiness is given. But that natural [happiness] is
pernaturalis. Quod vero præter hanc detur naturalis præter given in addition to this, besides what was said in the preceding section,
45 dicta, sect. præcedenti, potest ex altero membro ita declarari: can be shown from the other part. For if that happiness is supernatu-
nam si beatitudo illa supernaturalis est, potuit ergo Deus ab- 45R ral, then God could have made a human being without a miracle by not
sque miraculo condere hominem non ordinando illum ad illam ordering him to that happiness nor providing the way or means to him
beatitudinem, nec providendo illi modum, aut media, quibus by which he can seek after it. Nothing in this would go contrary to or
illam consequi possit, in quo nihil ageret contra , vel præter beyond that which is owed to such a nature. But a human being having
50 id, quod debitum est tali naturæ; sed homo sic conditus nec- been made in that way would necessarily have some natural happiness
essario habiturus esset aliquam beatitudinem naturalem, ad 50R to which, if he wished, he could reach. Therefore, it is necessary that
quam, si velit, possit pervenire: ergo necesse est præter su- in addition to supernatural happiness some natural happiness be given
pernaturalum beatitudinem dari in humana natura aliquam to human nature.
Suadetur maior
propositio
rationis factæ.
beatitudinem naturalem. Major mihi videtur certa, primo ex The major seems certain to me, first from the general consensus The major
proposition of
the argument just
made is urged.
55 communi consensu theologorum, qui in hoc sensu distingunt of theologians, who in this sense distinguish between a human being
hominem constitutum in puris naturalibus, ab homine elevato 55R constituted in purely natural [conditions] from a human elevated to a
ad finem supernaturalem, et utrumque statum censent esse pos- supernatural end and they think that either state is possible, because
sibilem, quoniam alias hominem esse ordinatum in hunc finem otherwise that a human being is ordered to this natural3 end would be
naturalem, esset debitum ipsi naturæ, et consequenter non es- owed to nature itself and consequently it would not be a gift of grace, as
60 set donum gratiæ, ut recte dixit Thomas, 1, 2, q. 110, art. 4, Thomas rightly says in [ST ] IaIIæ.110.4 ad 2, for grace is beyond every-
3Supernatural?
33 23 ] 25 V.
55 distingunt ] distinguunt V.
60 donum ] donorum V.

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 3 3
ad 2, gratia enim est supra omne naturæ debitum. Consequens 60R thing owed to nature. Moreover, the consequence is certainly false and
autem est valde falsum, magnamque præbens occasionem er- presents a great occasion for the Pelagian error. Because if ordination
rori Pelagii: quia si ordinatio in hunc finem esset naturæ debita, to this end were owed to nature, sufficient means to this end would also
etiam media sufficientia ad eumdem finem deberentur naturæ: be owed to nature. For just as what gives a form gives the consequences
65 nam sicut qui dat formam, dat consequentia ad formam; ita to the form, so also what gives the end necessarily is such that it con-
qui dat finem, necesse est ut conferat media conducentia ad il- 65R fers the means conducive to that end. Otherwise, such an ordination
lum finem, alias superflua esset talis ordinatio ad talem finem, to such an end would be superfluous, especially because the means and
præser- <col. b> tim, quia media et finis debent inter se ser- the end ought to preserve proportion between themselves and therefore
vare proportionem, et ideo sunt ejusdem ordinis et sub eadem they are of the same order and fall under the same providence. But a
70 providentia cadunt. Propria vero ratio a priori est, quia finis proper argument is from the former, because an end is not owed except
non debetur nisi ratione ipsius esse quasi primarii et substan- 70R by reason of itself being as it were primary and substantial. Therefore,
tialis: finis ergo supernaturalis solum correspondet ipsi gratiæ, a supernatural end only corresponds to grace itself, which is just as a
quæ est participatio veluti substantialis divinæ naturæ. Sicut participation in substantial divine nature. Therefore, just as this grace
ergo hæc gratia non est debita humanæ naturæ, ita nec beat- is not owed to human nature, so neither is that happiness, which is its
75 itudo illa, quæ est proprius finis illius: sicut ergo potuit hu- proper end. Therefore, just as human nature could have been created
mana natura creari absque gratia, et absque ulla promissione 75R without grace and without any promise of it, save every property and
illius, salva omni proprietate et providentia tali naturæ debita, providence owed to such a nature, so it could have been created without
ita potuit creari sine ordinatione ad finem supernaturalem. ordination to the supernatural end.
Suadetur minor
eiusdem rationis.
4. Jam vero probanda est minor propositio principalis ra- 4. But now the minor proposition of the principle argument The minor of the
same argument is
urged.
80 tionis, et probatur facile ex dictis supra, quia homo sic creatus should be shown and it is shown easily from what was said above, be-
haberet aliquem finem ultimum, et illum posset suis actionibus 80R cause a human being created thus would have some ultimate end and
aliquo modo attingere cognoscendo et amando illum: ergo es- would be able to attain it in some way with his actions by knowing and
set capax alicujus beatitudinis proportionatæ et connaturalis loving it. Therefore, he would be capable of some happiness propor-
sibi: ergo in humana natura datur aliqua beatitudo naturalis tionate and connatural to him. Therefore, some natural happiness is
85	Instantia
remouetur.
præter supernaturalem. Dices: Esto, hoc verum sit de homine given in human nature in addition to supernatural.
in puris naturalibus condito, non inde fit etiam nunc habere 85R You may say: It shall be that this is true of a human being in purely An objection is
removed.	hominem hanc beatitudinem naturalem. Respondetur, aliud natural conditions but that it does not happen for that reason that he
esse loqui de re, aliud de nomine: nam quod ad rem attinet, non now has this natural happiness. I respond that it is one thing to speak of
potest homo nunc non esse capax illius beatitudinis, seu perfec- the thing and another [to speak] of the name. For what pertains to the
90 tionis, quam haberet in puris naturalibus, quia nunc est eadem thing, a human cannot now not have the capacity for such happiness or
natura, et consequenter eadem capacitas: unde cum gratia non 90R perfection which he would have in purely natural [condition], because
destruat naturam, sed perficiat, non privat illam hac perfec- he is now the same nature and consequently [has] the same capacity.
tione naturali. Et ita certum est in supernaturali beatitudine Hence, since grace does not destroy nature but perfects, it does not rob
habiturum hominem omnem perfectionem sibi connaturalem, [his nature] of this natural perfection. And thus it is certain that in
95 quomodo probat D. Thomas, 1 p., q. 12, a. 12, hominem vi- supernatural happiness a human being will have every perfection con-
dentem Deum non privari cognitione naturali Dei, quin potius 95R natural to him, just as St. Thomas shows in [ST ] Ia.12.12 that a human
61 est ] om. V.

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 3 4
maxime in illa perfici; et idem proportionaliter est de amore. being seeing God is not deprived of natural cognition of God, lest he
Quod vero spectat ad modum loquendi, facile concedemus nat- not rather be especially perfected in that. And it is proportionatly like-
uralem beatitudinem non mereri nunc beatitudinis nomen ab- wise with love. But looking at that as a way of speaking, we readily
100 solute dictæ et sine aliquo addito diminuente, quia in homine concede that natural happiness does not now merit the name ‘happi-
elevato ad finem supernaturalem illa non habet rationem ul- 100R ness’, absolutely speaking and without diminishment by some added
timi termini, seu perfectionis ultimæ, propter quod si aliquis qualifier, because in a human being elevated to a supernatural end it
homo fortasse illam habere posset absque alia, ut aliqui exis- does not have the nature of an ultimate terminus or ultimate perfection.
timant de pueris excedentibus in solo originali peccato, non On account of this if some human perhaps can have that without the
105 posset dici simpliciter beatus, sed potius miser, quia caret beat- other, as some think concerning children who die with only original
itudine illa simpliciter, propter quam creatus est. 105R sin, he could not be called happy strictly speaking. Rather, he would be
miserable because he lacks that happiness for the sake of which he was
created.
2. Divisio in
beatitud. patriæ,
et viæ
5. Secundo, dividitur beatitudo in beatitudinem perfec- 5. Secondly, happiness is divided into the perfect happiness of fu- The second
division into the
happiness of this
life and of the
next life.
tam vitæ futuræ et imperfec- <45> tam hujus vitae. Hac utitur ture life and the imperfect happiness of this life. This division is used
frequenter divus Thomas in hac materia, patet 1, 2, quæst. 3, 110R frequently by St. Thomas in this matter. It is clear in [ST ] IaIIæ.3.2 ad
110 art. 2, ad. 4, et art. 5, et quæst. 5, art. 3, et habet fundamen- 4, 3.5, and 5.3 and has a foundation in Aristotle in EN I, c. 9 and 10 and
tum in Aristotele 1, Ethicor., cap. 9 et 10, et potest accom- can be accommodated to either member of the preceding division. And
Confertur
præsens diuisio
cum præcedenti
quoad vnum
membrum.
modari utrique membro præcedentis divisionis. Et ita potest thus the argument for it can easily be reused. For as far as supernatural The present
division is
compared to the
previous one
with respect to
one member.
facile reddi illius ratio: nam quod spectat ad supernaturalem happiness is concerned, it is certain by faith that according to ordinary
beatitudinem, certum de fide est secundum legem ordinariam, 115R law and apart from special privileges it is not obtained in this life in its
115 et, seclusis privilegiis, non obtineri in hac vita in tota sua per- complete essential perfection, as we will discuss later in its place. Still,
fectione essentiali, ut postea suo loco disputabimus: necesse est it is necessary that for the duration of this life something is best even
tamen ut pro tempore hujus vitæ aliquid sit optimum etiam in relative to the grace through which a human being is especially con-
ordine gratiæ, per quod homo maxime conjungatur suo super- joined with his supernatural end insofar as he can through this state.
naturali fini quantum pro hoc statu potest: illud ergo habebit 120R Therefore, that will have the nature of the happiness of this life, even
120 rationem beatitudinis hujus vitæ, quæ licet comparata ad illam, though in comparison to that for which we hope it is imperfect and
quam speramus, sit imperfecta et revera non sit beatitudo, quia really is not happiness, because [the will] does not stop in it but seeks
non sistit in illa, sed futuram inquirit per illam: nihilominus the future through it. Nevertheless, relative to this state of life, it can
in ordine ad hunc statum viæ, dici potest beatitudo, quia est be called happiness because it is its best and ultimate [state].
optimum et ultimum ejus.
125	Confertur quoad
alterum.
6. Atque eadem ratio facile applicari potest ad beati- 125R 6. And the same reasoning can easily be applied to natural hap- It is compared
with respect to
the other
member.
tudinem naturalem quæ in suo gradu, et ordine cum majori piness which in its rank and order can be acquired with greater per-
perfectione acquiri posset in hac vita quam supernaturalis beat- fection in this life than supernatural happiness in its order, because a
itudo in ordine suo, quia posset homo in hac vita cognoscere human being can know and contemplate God in this life in creatures,
et contemplari Deum in creaturis, illum amare et alia hon- love him, and exercise other honest works, which all have greater pro-
130 esta opera exercere, quæ omnia majorem proportionem habent 130R portion with cognition and natural love of God, which the separated
105–106 caret beatitudine illa simpliciter, propter quam ] om. V.
116 ut ] om. V.

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 3 5
cum cognitione, et amore Dei naturali, quæ potest habere an- soul can have, than the cognition of faith has, for example, with a clear
ima separata, quam habeat cognitio fidei, verbi gratia, cum vi- vision of God. And thus the philosophers placed the natural happiness
sione clara Dei. Atque ita philosophi naturalem beatitudinem of a human being especially through the state of this life. But the soul
hominis posuerunt præcipue pro statu hujus vitæ: supposita having been supposed immortal, it is necessary that it can also be happy
135 vero animi immortalitate, necesse est, ut etiam post hanc vitam 135R after this life, which is also called happiness of a human by reason of the
possit esse beata, quæ dicitur etiam beatitudo hominis ratione special part. But whether that happiness is also to be communicated to
partis præcipuæ: an vero illa etiam beatitudo communicanda the body, remaining in natural providence, we will touch on in another
esset corpori, stando in providentia naturali, attingemus alio place. And from this twofold division is gathered the order that should
loco. Atque ex hac duplici divisione colligitur ordo servandus be kept in this matter. For first and foremost should be spoken of the
140 in hac materia: nam primo ac præcipue dicendum est de beati- 140R supernatural happiness of the future life and in passing we will touch
tudine supernaturali futuræ vitæ, et obiter attingemus quæ per- on those things which pertain to imperfect happiness, namely, the nat-
tinent ad beatitudinem imperfectam, scilicet, naturalem hujus ural [happiness] of this life, but afterwards we will also discuss natural
vitæ, postea vero de naturali beatitudine in utroque etiam statu happiness in either state.
disseremus.
145	3. Divisio
beatitudinis in
speculativam, et
practicam, non
satis placet.
7. Tertio dividi solet beatitudo in speculativam et practi- 7. Thirdly, it is customary to divide happiness into speculative and The third
division of
happiness into
speculative and
practical is not
satisfactory.
cam: et habet fundamentum in Aristotele 10 Ethic., cap. 7, 8 145R practical. And this has a foundation in Aristotle in EN X, c. 7, 8, and
et 9, et illa etiam utitur D. Thomas, 1, 2, quæst. 3, art. 7, et 9, and it is also used by St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.3.7 and 5.4 and by
quæst. 5, art. 4, et alii <col. b> theologi in 4, dist. 49, præser- other theologians in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49, especially by Paludanus in
tim Paludanus, quæst. 4, art. 2. Et videtur in eo fundata hæc q. 4, art. 2. And it seems that this division is founded in the fact that
150 divisio, quod ad consummatam hominis beatitudinem requir- for consummate happiness of a human being is required perfection not
itur perfectio non tantum cognitionis, sed etiam operis, seu, 150R only of cognition but also of works, or, what is the same, of [both]
quod idem est, scientia et virtus. Nihilominus tamen hæc di- science and virtue. Nevertheless, this division is still not completely
visio non est admodum necessaria vel propria, quia vel neutra necessary or proper, because either [i] neither of them is the happiness
istarum est beatitudo hominis, sed pars beatitudinis ejus, quæ of a human but is only a part of his happiness which is composed of
155 ex utraque conflatur: vel certe (quod verius est) si altera tantum both or, surely (which is more correct), [ii] if one of them alone is
est beatitudo, altera non meretur hoc nomen, nisi valde impro- 155R happiness, the other does not merit this name except very improperly
prie, quatenus est aliquid ad completum statum beatitudinis insofar as it is something necessary for the complete state of happiness.
necessarium. Et ita sentiunt Aristoteles et D. Thomas de felic- And Aristotle and St. Thomas think this concerning felicity, because
itate, quia cum non sit propter se, sed propter aliud non habet since it is not for its own sake but for the sake of another it does not
160 propriam beatitudinis rationem, ut postea latius videbimus. have the proper nature of happiness, as we will see more thoroughly
160R later.
4. Diuisio, quæ
etiam reiicitur.
8. Quarto dividitur a quibusdam beatitudo in beatitudinem 8. Fourthly, happiness is divided by certain people into the hap- The fourth
division, which is
also rejected.
hominis et in beatitudinem tantum potentiæ alicujus, quo- piness of a human being and the happiness of some power alone, in
modo beatitudo hominis, verbi gratia, licet non consistat in which way, for example, although the happiness of a human does not
amore, tamen beatitudo voluntatis dicetur consistere in amore. consist in love, nevertheless the happiness of the will is said to con-
165 Sed hæc divisio nec ab aliis auctoribus celebrata est neque ab 165R sist in love. But this division is not upheld by other authors nor is it
Scoto probatur aliqua ratione, neque aliquam utilitatem affert proven with some argument by Scotus nor is it of any use for the things
ad ea quæ dicenda sunt; et præterea valde improprie dicitur that need to be discussed. And, in addition, it is improper to talk of a

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 3 6
potentia beatificari, persona enim est vel natura, quæ proprie power being made happy, for it is a person or a nature which properly
per personam beatificatur. Tandem vel operatio potentiæ est is made happy through the person. Finally, the activity of the power
170 consecutio ultimi finis integra, vel partialis; aut nullo modo 170R is the achievement either of an integrated ultimate end or of a partial
est consecutio: si primum, per talem operationem non solum [ultimate end]. But there is no achievement in either way. If the first,
persona, sed etiam potentia beatificatur vel in totum, vel ex then through such an action not only the person but also the power is
parte, quia per talem operationem consequitur aliquo modo made happy either in whole or in part, because its end is achieved in
suum finem; si vero dicatur secundum, talis operatio nec erit some way through such an action. But if the second is spoken of, then
175 beatitudo hominis, nec personæ, cum sermo sit de beatitudine 175R such an action will be happiness neither of the human nor of the per-
propria, quæ consistit in consecutione ultimi finis. Solum ig- son, since the discussion is of happiness proper, which consists in the
itur duæ primæ divisiones ad discursum hujus materiæ nobis achievement of the ultimate end. Therefore, only the first two divisions
deserviunt. are useful for our discussion of this material.

-- 6 of 6 --
