Last revision: December 18, 2010	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 3, SECT. 51
© Sydney Penner 2010
<35, col. b>2
Utrum necesse sit, hominem semper operari propter finem ulti- Whether it is necessary that a human being always act for the sake of an
mum simpliciter a se intentum. unqualifiedly ultimate end that he himself intends.
Duplex sensus
quæstionis.
1. Duplex potest esse sensus quæstionis, primus absolutus, an 1. The question can have two senses. The first is absolute: whether it Two senses of the
question.	necessarium sit præcedere in homine aliquam intentionem finis is necessary that there precede in a human being some intention for an
5 ultimi absolute propter quem operetur. Secundo ex hypoth- 5R absolutely ultimate end for the sake of which he acts. The second is by
esi, an postquam homo habuit talem intentionem, necessarium hypothesis: whether after a human being had such an intention, it is nec-
sit, ut ab illa procedant omnes alii actus circa fines particulares. essary that all other acts about particular ends proceed from it.
Expeditur prior
sensus.
Prior sensus resolutus fere est ex dictis in prima sectione hujus The former sense was nearly resolved by what was said in the first The former sense
is explained.	disputationis, pauca vero addenda sunt propter quosdam auc- section of this disputation, but a few words should be added because of
10 tores, qui necessarium putant, ut ante omnes intentiones finem 10R certain authors who think that in a human being acting rationally an in-
particularium, antecedant in homine secundum rationem oper- tention for the universal ultimate end must precede before every intention
ante, intentio finis ultimi universalis, non quidem finis ultimi for a particular end—[a universal ultimate end, but] not indeed a material
materialis, quia non est necesse, ut in aliqua re particulari pri- ultimate end, because it is not necessary for an unqualifiedly ultimate end
mum omnium ponatur finis ultimus simpliciter, quia neque hoc to be placed first of all in some particular thing, for neither is this neces-
15 est necessarium ad posteriores actus, qui versantur circa particu- 15R sary for the posterior acts which are turned to particular goods. And this
laria bona, nec fere est homini possibile, quia constituere finem is hardly possible for a human being, because to constitute the ultimate
ultimum in hac, vel illa re, est valde difficile, et magnam cog- end in this or that thing is very difficult and requires powerful cognition.
De 2. sensu
placitum
aliquorum.
nitionem requirit: loquuntur ergo hi auctores de fine ultimo Therefore, these authors speak of the formal ultimate end, that is, of the Of the 2nd sense
pleasing to some.	formali, id est, de complemento totius boni, volunt enim nec- complement of all good. For they want it to be necessary that the first
20 essarium esse, ut primus actus humanæ voluntatis sit circa fe- 20R act of a human will is about felicity or about the good in general or about
licitatem, vel circa bonum in communi, seu circa perfectum et the perfect and complete good of a human being, so that acts concerning
completum bonum ho- <36> mini, ut ex hoc affectu oriantur particular goods arise from this disposition (affectu).
actus circa particularia bona. Huic sententiæ videtur favere di- St. Thomas seems to favour this view in these words from [ST ]
vus Thomas, prima secunda, quæst. 1, art. 6, ad 3, in illis ver- IaIIæ.1.6 ad 3: ‘The force of the first intention which is with respect to
25 bis: Virtus primæ intentionis, quæ est respectu ultimi finis, movet 25R the ultimate end moves in any desire for whatever thing, even if one does
in quocumque appetitu cujuscumque rei, etsi de ultimo fine actu not actually think about the ultimate end’. The same seems to be thought
non cogitet. Idem videtur sentire in 1 part., quæst. 60, art. 2, in Ia.60.2 [co.]; in Capreolus, [Sent.] I, dist. 1, q. 5, art. 1, concerning the
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628
edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès
edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 5 2
et Capreolus, in 1, dist. 1, quaest. 5, art. 1, circa primam con- first conclusion and in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49, q. 3, a. 1; and in Cajetan, [ST ]
clusionem, et in 4, dist. 49, quæst. 3, a. 1, et Cajetanus, eadem IaIIæ.1.6 and in Ia.22.2, dub. 2. They usually also cite Durandus in [Sent.]
30 1, 2, et 1 part., quæst. 22, art. 2, dub. 2. Citari etiam solent 30R II, dist. 38, q. 3 and dist. 39, q. 3 and Henry [of Ghent] Quodl. III, q. 17.
Durandus, in 2, dist. 38, quæst. 3, et dist. 39, quæst. 3, et Hen- But these authors say nothing expressly but only that the will is naturally
riquez, quodlibeto 3, quæst. 17. Sed hi auctores nihil expresse carried to a good proposed to it.
dicunt, sed solum voluntatem naturaliter ferri in bonum sibi
propositum.
35	Eorum
fundamentum
primum.
2. Fundamentum hujus sententiæ est primo, quia voluntas 2. The foundation of this view is first because the will cannot love Their 1st
foundation.	non potest amare bonum imperfectum, nisi propter perfectum: an imperfect good except for the sake of a perfect [good]. Moreover, any
quodlibet autem particulare bonum est imperfectum: ergo vol- 35R particular good you please is imperfect. Therefore, the will does not desire
untas non appetit illud nisi ex vi intentionis boni perfecti et con- it except by strength of an intention for a perfect and complete good.
Secundum. summati. Secundo, quia sicut secundæ causæ efficientes, pen- Secondly, because just as second efficient causes depend essentially in 2nd.
40 dent essentialiter in causalitate sua ab influxu primæ causæ, et their causality on the influx of a first cause, so also particular ends depend
ita particulares fines pendent ab ultimo: ergo sicut non potest on an ultimate [end]. Therefore, just as a second cause cannot act without
causa secunda agere, nisi movente prima, ita non possunt fines 40R the moving of a first [cause], so particular ends cannot move without the
particulares movere nisi movente ultimo, quia non movet nisi moving of an ultimate [end], because they do not move except by virtue
virtute præcedentis intentionis: ergo necesse est ut hujusmodi of the preceding intention. Therefore, it is necessary that the intention
45	Tertium. intentio præcedat. Tertio, quia, juxta Aristotelem, ita se habet precede in this way.
finis ultimus in appetibilibus, sicut prima principia in specula- Thirdly, because, according to Aristotle, the ultimate end is related 3rd.
bilibus: sed non potest intellectus assentire conclusionibus, nisi 45R to desirable things just as the first principle to speculative things. But
præcedat assensus circa principia: ergo nec potest voluntas ferri the intellect cannot assent to conclusions without assent to the principle
in particulares fines nisi præcedat intentio circa ultimum. having preceded. Therefore, neither can the will be brought to particular
ends without an intention for the ultimate [end] preceding.3
50	1. Assertio pro
priore sensu
quæstionis.
3. Sed quod attinet ad hanc priorem partem, sive sen- 3. But with regards to the first part or sense of the question, it should The 1st assertion
for the prior
sense of the
question.
sum quæstionis, dicendum est, non esse necessarium absolute, 50R be said that it is not necessary absolutely that an intention for an ultimate
ut ante intentiones seu appetitiones particularium bonorum end, either formal or material, go before intentions or desires for partic-
præcedat intentio finis ultimi vel formalis, vel materialis. Hæc ular goods. This is the view of Scotus in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49, q. 3 and in
est sententia Scoti, in 4, distinct. 49, quæst. 3, et in 1, quæst. 4, I, q. 4, where John Mair follows this way. And Durandus clearly thinks
55 ubi Major modum hunc sequitur, et plane idem sentit Duran- the same, in the second place cited above, [i.e., Sent. II, dist. 39, q. 3, as
dus, secundo loco supra citato, Medina 1, 2, ad art. 6, supra 55R well as Medina in [ST ] IaIIæ. ad art. 6, cited above. In the end, he judges
citatum. Tandem judicat hanc sententiam probabiliorem. Et this view more probable. And it can easily be proven from what was said
probari facile potest ex dictis, sect. 1 hujus disputationis, et ex in sect. 1 of this disputation and confirms it from the part. For is there
parte illam confirmat: quis est enim, qui hujusmodi actum in se anyone who has experienced an act of this sort in himself that is before
60	Demonstratur
tripartito
argumento.
expertus sit ante omnes alios? Et ratione demonstratur breviter, everything else?
quia vel necessitas hujus actus oritur ex intellectione, aut ex ob- 60R And it can be demonstrated briefly by argument, because the neces- It is
demonstrated by
a tripartite
argument.
3Aquinas seems to make arguments very much like this in ST Ia.60.2 co. and Sent. IV, dist. 49, q. 1, art. 3, qc. 4, co.
58 et ] om. V.

-- 2 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 5 3
jecto, aut ex voluntate ipsa <col. b> indigente hujusmodi actu sity of this act arises either [i] from the intellection, [ii] from the object,
ad alios subsequentes, sed nullum horum potest probabiliter or [iii] from the will itself requiring an act of this kind before other sub-
Primo. dici primum de intellectu. Probatur, quia nihil est, quod ne- sequent [acts]. But none of these can plausibly be said.
65 cessitet illum ad cogitandum prius de bono: quin potius facilius Firstly, concerning the intellect. It is shown: because there is nothing First.
excitet ad aliquam exteriorem cogitationem, tum quia movetur 65R that necessitates it to cognizing first concerning the good. In fact, it more
a sensibus, qui primo offerunt particularia bona: tum etiam, easily excites to some external cogitation, first, because it is moved by
quia in infantia ante usum rationis habet homo consuetudinem the senses, which in the first place offer particular goods, and then also,
Secundo. cogitandi de his particularibus bonis. Secundum de objecto, because a human being in infancy before he has the use of reason has a
70 etiam per se constat, quia si objectum illud non sit prius cogni- custom of thinking about these particular goods.
tum, non prius movebit voluntatem: ostensum autem est non 70R Secondly, concerning the object. It also is evident per se, because if Second.
necessario prius cognosci, aut proponi, et aliunde in bonis par- that object is not first cognized, it will not first move the will. Moreover,
ticularibus, quæ per se bona sunt, est sufficiens ratio objectiva it was shown that it is not necessarily first cognized or proposed, and,
ad movendam voluntatem, et terminandum actum ejus, quia in from elsewhere, in the case of particular goods which are good per se, an
75 quolibet bono continetur communis boni ratio, quæ est for- objective reason is sufficient for moving the will and terminating its act,
Tertio. malis ratio objecti voluntatis. Et hinc tandem concluditur ul- 75R because the nature of general good, which is the nature of the object of
tima pars, quod nec ex parte voluntatis creatæ datur hæc ne- the will, is contained in any good whatever.
cessitas, quia si objecto sit sufficiens ratio, ut per se ametur, And from here, finally, is concluded the last part, that this necessity is Third.
voluntas habet sufficientem virtutem, ut eliciat actum circa il- not given on the part of the created will, because if the object is a sufficient
80 lud absque priori actu, quia habet naturalem inclinationem ad reason so that it is loved per se, the will has sufficient strength for eliciting
bonum, et vires ad appetendum illud si sibi proportionatur: hac 80R an act concerning it without a prior act. [This is] because it has a natural
enim ratione quælibet alia potentia animæ sive sensitiva, sive in- inclination to the good and strength for desiring that if it is proportionate
tellectiva, potest primo operari circa quodlibet objectum, si sibi to the will. For this reason any other power of the soul, whether sensitive
sufficienter proponatur: nulla est ergo necessitas, ut ille actus or intellective, can first act concerning any object, if it is sufficiently pro-
85 generalis alios antecedat, nec rationes contrariæ sententiæ aliq- posed to it. Therefore, there is no necessity that that general act precede
uid probant. 85R the others, nor do the arguments for the contrary view show anything.
4. Circa secundum sensum quæstionis positæ, qui sequun- 4. Concerning the second sense of the posited question, those who
tur primam sententiam citatam, numer. 3, consequenter dicunt, follow the first cited view, n. 3, consequently say that, an intention for
supposita intentione ultimi finis, necessarium esse ut reliquæ the ultimate end having been assumed, it is necessary that the remaining
90 particulares intentiones ab illa procedant ut a causa et ratione particular intentions proceed from it as from a cause and reason for acting.
operandi: imo ad hoc ponunt illam primam intentionem, ut sit 90R Indeed, for this reason they posit that first intention so that it is the cause
2. Assertio pro
2. sensu
quæstionis.
causa cæterarum. Dicendum tamen est, etiamsi contingat illam of the rest. Nevertheless, it should be said that even if happens that that 2nd assertion for
the 2nd sense of
the question.
universalem intentionem praecedere, non esse necessarium, ut universal intention precede, it is not necessary that all the posterior acts
ab illa procedant omnes posteriores actus voluntatis, qui versan- of the will which are turned to particular goods proceed from it. From
95	Probatur. tur circa particularia bona. Ex quo evidentius constat, illam in- this it is even more evident that that intention is not necessary.
tentionem non esse necessaria. Probatur, quia talis intentio, vel 95R It is proven: for such an intention either actually or virtually gives in- It is proven.
influeret actu, vel virtute in actus posteriores: neutrum autem flux to the posterior acts. But neither can be said. Therefore, [it gives in-
dici potest: ergo nullo modo, omitto enim relationem mere ha- flux to them] in no way (for I omit the merely habitual relation, because,
bitualem, quia, ut supra dixi, hæc non consistit in aliquo influxu as I said above [in disp. 2, sec. 4, n. 3], this does not consist in any in-

-- 3 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 5 4
100 et vera causalitate, sed est mere extrinseca. Probatur ergo prior flux and true causality, but is merely extrinsic). Therefore, the prior part
pars de actuali influxu, quia hic non est sine actuali cogitatione: 100R concerning actual influx is proven, because this does not exist without ac-
non semper autem actu cogitamus de <37> ultimo fine quando tual cogitation. Moreover, we do not always think about the ultimate end
aliquid appetimus in particulari. Altera vero pars de virtuali in- when we desire something in particular. But the other part concerning
fluxu probatur, quia fieri potest ut illa intentio tanto tempore virtual influx is proven because it can happen that that intention went be-
105 antecesserit, ut omnino non maneat nec in memoria, nec, in fore by such a long time that nothing remains in memory or in any effect
aliquo effectu suo: influxus autem virtualis intelligi non potest 105R of it. Virtual influx, however, cannot be understood without something
sine aliquo istorum, ut supra ostensum est, disput. 2, sect. 4, of these, as was shown above, disp. 2, sec. 4, n. 4. Therefore.
Confirm. num. 4; ergo. Et confirmatur, nam licet demus præcessisse in And it is confirmed: for although we may grant that the desire for his It is confirmed.
homine appetitum consummati boni sui, tamen fieri potest, ut consummate good precedes in a human being, yet it can happen that such
110 talis homo nunquam contulerit particulare bonum, verbi gratia, a human being will never consider a particular good, for example, health,
sanitatem cum illo objecto universali, considerando nimirum 110R with respect to that universal object, considering without doubt that this
hoc bonum esse partem quamdam illius completi boni: ergo good is a certain part of that complete good. Therefore, when the will
quando voluntas postea appetit hoc particulare bonum, non afterwards desires this particular good it is not moved by the strength of
movetur ex vi prioris intentionis, sed solum ex vi præsentis ob- the prior intention, but only by the strength of the present object, because
115 jecti, quia ad amandum, vel eligendum ex vi præcedentis inten- the intention alone does not suffice for loving or electing with the strength
tionis, non sufficit sola intentio, sed requiritur etiam collatio 115R of the preceding intention, but it requires also the bringing together of the
objecti electionis cum objecto intentionis, quæ fit per consulta- object of election with the object of the intention, which happens through
tionem, ut postea dicam. consideration (consultationem), as I will talk about later.
Concluditur
proposita
quæstio.
5. Atque ex his tandem concluditur, non esse necessarium 5. And from these is finally concluded that it is not necessary that a The proposed
question is
concluded.
120 hominem operari semper propter ultimum finem simpliciter a human being always act for the sake of an unqualifiedly ultimate end that
se intentum, seu ex vi intentionis suæ, vel quia non est necesse 120R he has intended or [that he always act] from the force of his intention
ut talis intentio antecedat, vel quia etiamsi antecesserit, non [for such an end], either because it is not necessary that such an intention
est necesse ut ab illa procedant reliqui omnes actus: utrumque go before or because even if it went before it is not necessary that all the
enim ostensum est. Et ita soluta relinquitur quædam confir- remaining acts proceed from it. For each of them has been shown. And
125 matio posita in fine sectionis præcedentis huc remissa, et ex ibi [with the question] thus resolved, a certain confirmation posited at the
dictis confirmari etiam potest hæc veritas. Quo autem sensu 125R end of the preceding section and having been referred to here remains.
D. Thomas sit exponendus, dicam, sect, sequent., ex quo etiam And from what was said there this truth can also be confirmed. Moreover,
facile patebunt solutiones rationum primæ sententiæin num. 2, in what sense St. Thomas should be explained, I will say in subsequent
quæ solum probant ad summum voluntatem debere semper sections, by which also it will easily be clear what the solutions of the
130 moveri ab aliquo objecto bono per se amabili, quod in se inclu- arguments of the first view in n. 2 are, which only show at most that the
dat rationem communem boni, et in virtute contineat aliquo 130R will ought always to be moved by some good object lovable in itself, that
modo saltem implicite et interpretative ultimum finem, ut jam in itself includes the general nature of good and in virtue of that contains
explico. the ultimate end in some way, at least implicitly and interpretatively, as I
will explain now.
107 4 ] 5 V.

-- 4 of 4 --
