Last revision: February 5, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 5, SECT. 21
© Sydney Penner 2011
<48, col. b>2
Utrum solus Deus sine consortio alicujus creaturæ sit sufficiens Whether God alone without the association of any creatures is a sufficient
objectum beatitudinis. object of happiness.
1. Ratio
dubitandi.
1. Ratio dubii est, quia licet Deus sit supremum hominis 1. The reason for doubt is that, although God is the supreme good The first reason
for doubting.	bonum, non tamen est unicum ejus bonum: nam præter for a human being, nevertheless, he is not his single good. For besides
5 Deum, indiget homo ut commode vivat, et bonis corporis, et 5R God, a human being needs both bodily goods and other goods of the
aliis bonis animæ præter cognitionem Dei, quæ omnia bona soul (which naturally desires all these goods) besides cognition of God
naturaliter appetit: ergo non satiatur appetitus hominis Deo: in order to live advantageously. Therefore, the desire of a human be-
ergo solus Deus non est sufficiens objectum beatitudinis ejus. ing is not satisfied with God. Therefore, God alone is not a sufficient
Evasio
præcluditur.
Nec satisfaciet si quis respondeat, hæc omnia bona contineri object of his happiness. Nor will it satisfy if someone responds that An evasion is
blocked off.	10 in Deo, continentur enim eminenter, non formaliter: homo 10R all these goods are contained in God, for they are contained eminently,
autem indiget illis prout formaliter illum perficere possunt not formally. But a human being needs them as they formally perfect
non tantum secundum eminentiam suam: nec enim erit homo him, not only according to his eminence. For a human being will not
sanus cognoscendo sanitatem, quæ est eminenter in Deo, sed be healthy by cognizing the health which is eminently in God, but by
2. Ratio. habendo in se formalem sanitatem, et sic de aliis. Secundo having formal health in himself. And likewise concerning the others.
15 auget difficultatem, quia ut homo sit beatus, non satis est videre 15R Secondly, it increases the difficulty, since in order for a human being to The second
reason.	Deum: sed necesse est ut videat se videre, quia alias, nec amare be happy, it is not enough to see God. Rather, it is necessary that he see
poterat suam beatitudinem, nec de illa gaudere: propter quod that he sees, because otherwise he can neither love his own happiness
quidam dixere, magis consistere beatitudinem nostram in cog- nor rejoice in it. For this reason some said that our happiness consists
nitione reflexa, quam in directa: ergo in objecte nostræ beat- more in a reflexive cognition than in a direct [cognition]. Therefore,
20 itudinis non solum continetur Deus, sed visio Dei, illa vero 20R God is not contained alone in the object of our happiness, but the vi-
creatura est. Simile argumentum fieri potest de amore, quia, ut sion of God. But that is a created thing. A similar argument can be
simus beati, non satis est videre Deum, sed etiam <49> videre made about love, because in order for us to be happy it is not enough to
illum ut summum bonum a nobis dilectum, quia non potest see God but [we need] also to see him as the highest good loved by us.
beatificare, nisi quod amatur, et quatenus tale esse cognoscitur, For nothing can make us happy, unless it is loved and insofar as it is cog-
25 quia beatitudo est satietas amoris, et terminus ejus: ergo in illo 25R nized to be such. For happiness is the satiety of love and its terminus.
objecto includitur non solum Deus, sed etiam amor Dei, qui Therefore, not God but also the love of God is included in that object.
est quid creatum. Simile etiam est, quia ut simus beati, necesse [But the love] is something created. It is also similar because in order
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not
always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 5, sect. 2 2
est ut cognoscamus beatitudinem nostram perpetuo duratu- that we be happy it is necessary that we cognize our happiness as last-
ram, alias non posset excludi omnis timor et anxietas, prout ing perpetually. Otherwise, it could not exclude all fear and anxiety, as
30 ad beatitudinem necesse est: ergo in objecto nostræ beatitu- 30R is necessary for happiness. Therefore, not only is God included in the
dinis includitur non solum Deus, sed etiam perpetua duratio object of our happiness, but also the perpetual duration of that happi-
ejusdem beatitudinis; illam autem duratio creatum quid est. ness. Finally, there can be a difficulty concerning natural happiness, for
Tandem de beatitudine naturali potest esse difficultas, quia non our soul cannot cognize God except in cognizing itself or some other
potest anima nostra cognoscere Deum nisi cognoscendo seip- creature. Indeed, neither can God be seen in supernatural happiness (as
35 sam, vel aliquam aliam creaturam; imo nec in beatitudine su- 35R many think), except by having seen creatures in some way. Therefore.
pernaturali (ut multi existimant) potest videri Deus, nisi visis
in ipso aliquo modo creaturis: ergo.
Resolutio
quorundam
rejicitur.
2. In hac quæstione philosophi omnes sensisse videntur in- 2. In this question all the philosophers seem to think that a hu- The resolution of
some is rejected.	digere hominem præter Deum aliis bonis creatis ad felicitatem man being requires for his felicity other created goods in addition to
40 suam: non tamen accurate distinxerunt, aut intellexerunt, an God. Nevertheless, they have not accurately distinguished or under-
illa bona sint essentialia, ut particularia objecta essentialis beat- stood whether these goods are essential as particular objects of essential
itudinis, vel soIum ut dispositiones quædam vel proprietates, 40R happiness or only as dispositions of a certain sort or properties or acci-
seu accidentariæ perfectiones ejus: quinimo etiam inter theol- dental perfections of happiness. In fact, even among the theologians—
ogos, Durandus, Olcotus, et alii, quos citavi, disput. præced., Durandus, Holcot, and others whom I cited in the preceding disputa-
45 sect. 1, contenti illa distinctione beatitudinis quatenus signifi- tion, sect. 1—after having secured that distinction of happiness insofar
cat aut perfectissimam operationem, aut collectionem omnium as it indicates either the most perfect activity or the collection of all
bonorum, respondent, solum Deum esse objectum beatitudi- 45R goods, they respond that God alone is the object of happiness taken
nis priori modo sumptæ, non tamen posteriori modo. Sed hu- in the former way, but yet not in the latter way. But a distinction of
jusmodi distinctio non deservit ad rem explicandam, sed potius this sort does not serve to explain the matter, but rather confuses it.
50 confundit illam: nam juxta illam responsionem videtur sequi, For according to that response it seems to follow that God is in no way
Deum nullo modo esse adæquatum objectum nostræ beatitu- an adequate object of our happiness, but a partial [object], although
Notatio pro vera
resolutione.
dinis, sed partiale, quamvis præcipuum. Supponendo ergo ser- 50R the principal one. Therefore, in supposing the discussion to be about A note towards a
true resolution.	monem esse de propria, et essentiali beatitudine, advertendum proper and essential happiness, it should be noted that it is one thing
est aliud esse loqui de proprio objecto bono, cujus consecu- to talk about the proper good object by the attainment of which we are
55 tione beati sumus, alia vero de his, quæ vel cum illo objecto happy but another thing [to talk] about those things which either are
conjuncta sunt, vel ex parte nostra sunt necessaria ad conse- conjoined with that object or are necessary on our part for attaining
quendum illud objectum perfecte, et ut in nobis efficiat illos ef- 55R that object perfectly and as it effects in us all those effects which perfect
fectus omnes, quos perfecta beatitudo requirit: non enim om- happiness requires. For it is not necessary that all those things which
nia, quæ hoc modo requiruntur, oportet ut sint proprie objecta are required in this way are properly objects of essential happiness, just
60 beatitudinis essentialis, sicut non omnia quæ sunt necessaria ad as not all those things which are necessary for the introduction or con-
introductionem, vel conservationem formæ, nec etiam quæ illa servation of a form—nor also those things which follow it—pertain to
consequuntur, pertinent ad essentiale compositum. <col. b> 60R the essential composite.
Assertio affirmat. 3. Dicendum ergo est absolute et simpliciter, solum Deum 3. Therefore, it should be said that absolutely and strictly speak- An affirmative
assertion.	esse objectum nostræ beatitudinis essentialis, atque hoc modo ing that God alone is the object of our essential happiness and in this
65 illum sine consortio creaturæ sufficere ad nostram beatitudi- way he suffices for our happiness without the association of creatures. I

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 5, sect. 2 3
nem. Quam assertionem existimo certam, et ita in ea con- think this assertion certain and in that way all the theologians consent
Sumitur ex
Sacr. lit.
sentiunt omnes theologi, et colligitur ex modo loquendi sacræ 65R to it. And it is gathered from the way of speaking in the holy Scripture. It is taken from
the holy letters.	Scripturæ; primo ex illis locis, in quibus Deus solus ultimus fi- First, from those places in which God alone is our ultimate end, as we
nis noster, ut supra tractavimus, disp. 3, sect. 1, nam idem est discussed above in disp. 3, sect. 1. For the ultimate end and the object of
70 finis ultimus, et objectum beatitudinis. Deinde ex illis locu- happiness are the same thing. Next, from those locutions: ‘They called
tionibus, beatum dixerunt populum, cui hæc sunt: beatus popu- the people happy to whom these things are; happy the people of whom
lus, cujus Dominus Deus ejus. Psal. 143, et 72: Pars mea Deus in 70R the Lord is its God’ (Ps. 144[:15]). And: ‘God is my portion for eter-
æternum; et, Non glorietur sapiens in sapientia sua, nec fortis in nity’ (Ps. 73[:26]). And: ‘Let not the wise one boast in his wisdom, nor
fortitudine sua, sed in hoc glorietur, scire et nosse me, Jerem. 9. the strong in his strength, but let him boast in this, that he knows and
75 Faciunt etiam illa verba Christi Joann. 17: Hæc est vita æterna, understands me’ (Jer. 9[:23–24]). These words of Christ also compose
ut cognoscant te solum Deum verum, etc., nam de vera beat- John 17[:3]: ‘This is eternal life, that they may know you, the only true
itudine multi Patres locum illum interpretantur, quos in suo 75R God. . . . ’ For many of the Fathers interpreted this place to be about
loco indicabo. Docuit etiam hanc veritatem Nyssenus, lib. de true happiness, as I will indicate in its place. [Gregory of] Nyssa also
Beatitudinibus, beatitudine 6, eamque colligit ex illa promis- taught this truth in De beat., beatitude 6, and he gathers it from that
80 sione Christi, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Optime eamdem promise of Christ ‘because they will see God’. Augustine discusses the
tractat, et ex sacra Scriptura confirmat Augustinus, lib. 22, de same [truth] best and confirms it from sacred Scripture in De civ. Dei
Civitate, cap. 30, præmium, inquit, virtutis erit ipse, qui vir- 80R XXII, c. 30: ‘the reward of virtue’, he says, ‘will be he who gave virtue’.
tutem dedit. Colligitur etiam ex Extravaganti Benedicti XI, It is also gathered from the Extravagans of Benedict XI, to which Castro
quam refert Castro, verbo Beati, ubi definit beatitudinem nos- refers under the word ‘the happy’, where he determines that our hap-
85	Suadetur a
posteriori.
tram consistere in visione et fruitione Dei. Unde a posteriori piness consists in the vision and enjoyment of God. Whence it can be It is urged a
posteriori.	confirmari potest. Nam Christus Dominus in via fuit abso- confirmed a posteriori. For the Lord Christ was absolutely and strictly
lute et simpliciter beatus propter hanc visionem et fruitionem, 85R speaking happy in this life on account of this vision and enjoyment,
etiamsi affectus esset multis malis pœnæ; et similiter animæ even though he was affected with many evil punishments. And, simi-
sanctæ sunt absolute beatæ, quamvis careant corporibus, et larly, the holy souls are absolutely happy, even though they lack bodies
90 consequenter aliis bonis corporis. Et addere possumus, si fin- and consequently the other bodily goods. And we can add that if we
gamus non esse in mundo aliam creaturam, nisi unam animam imagined there to be in the world no other creature but one soul seeing
videntem et amantem Deum illam fuisse futuram sufficienter 90R and loving God, it would be sufficiently happy and yet would neither
beatam, et tamen nec cognosceret, nec frueretur alia creatura; cognize nor enjoy other creatures. Moreover, although it necessarily
quamvis autem supponat necessario existentiam ipsius animæ assumes the existence of the soul itself and its faculties, yet not through
95 et facultatum ejus, non tamen per modum objecti, sed subjecti the mode of object but of the subject of happiness, as we said above, it is
beatitudinis, ut supra dicebamus, ipsa non est finis sui, sed se not its end but it ought to refer itself to God. It is also a sign of this that
ipsam debet in Deum referre. Cujus etiam signum est, quia 95R even if we were to imagine such a soul not to cognize itself, but only
etiamsi fingeremus talem animam non cognoscere seipsam, sed to see God and to enjoy him, it would be happy by this alone, since its
solum videre Deum, ipsoque frui, hoc ipso solo esset beata, ultimate end was achieved.
100 quia consecuta est ultimum finem suum.
Ratio a priori. 4. Atque hinc reddi potest ratio hujus veritatis, quia ut 4. And from here an argument for this truth can be delivered, since An argument a
priori.	Aristoteles ait 1, Ethicor., capite septimo, finis perfectus sim- as Aristotle says in EN I, c. 7, the perfect end, strictly speaking, is that
pliciter est qui <50> propter se semper, et nunquam ob al- 100R which is always for its own sake and never for the sake of something

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 5, sect. 2 4
iud est; talis autem est felicitas: sed solus Deus est perfectus fi- else. But such a thing is felicity. But God alone is the perfect end who
105 nis, propter se amandus, et reliqua omnia propter ipsum: ergo should be loved for his own sake and all other things for his sake. There-
solus ipse est objectiva beatitudo simpliciter humanæ naturæ. fore, he alone is the objective happiness, strictly speaking, of human
Confirm. 1. Quod in hunc modum confirmatur et explicatur. Nam licet in nature. This is confirmed and explained in this way: for although with It is confirmed,
first.	beatitudine multa requirantur bona ad completum statum ejus, 105R regard to happiness many goods are required for its complete state, nev-
tamen, ut recte Augustinus dixit, dicto libro de Civitate, om- ertheless, as Augustine rightly said in the cited book of De civ. Dei, all
110 nia debent in laudem Dei ordinari, illumque tanquam finem things ought to be ordered to the glory of God and to respect him as
ultimum respicere; id autem, quod est finis, et ultimum bono- the ultimate end. That, moreover, which is the end and the ultimate of
rum omnium, illud est proprium et per se objectum beatitudi- all goods is the proper and per se object of happiness. It is confirmed in It is confirmed,
secondly.	Confirm. 2. nis. Confirmatur præterea ex Aristotele eodem 1, Ethicorum, 110R addition from Aristotle in the same book I of EN, c. 7: a perfect good
capite septimo: perfectum bonum est, quod per se est suffi- is that which is per se sufficient. But we consider that per se sufficient
115 ciens; sufficiens autem per se, illud esse ponimus, quod solum which alone and removed from all the other [goods] makes life desir-
a cæteris segregatum expetibilem vitam facit, reique nullius in- able and lacking in nothing. But we think felicity to be something of
digentem: hujusmodi autem felicitatem existimamus esse, li- this kind. Moreover, in EN X, c. 2, he adds with Plato that the highest
bro autem 10, Ethicorum, capite secundo, addit cum Platone, 115R good is such per se and with nothing added to it and does not become
summum bonum per se, et nullo addito tale esse, et non fieri more desirable on account of adding another good. For ‘by that fact’,
120 expetibilius propter additum alterius boni; nam hoc ipso, in- he says, ‘it would not be the highest good’. Whence the argument is
quit, non esse summum bonum. Unde concluditur ratio: nam concluded: for God alone is per se the highest good, strictly speaking,
Deus per se solus est summum bonum simpliciter, et perfecta and a perfect union with him or an attainment of him is per se most
cum ipso conjunctio, seu illius adeptio est per se maxime ex- 120R desirable and sufficient for the perfection of a human being, not only
petibilis et sufficiens ad perfectionem hominis, non solum quia because every good is eminently contained in God but also because he
125 in Deo continetur omne bonum eminenter, sed etiam quia se- brings along with himself whatever can be necessary for the happiness
cum affert quidquid ad beatitudinem hominis necessarium esse of a human being. And it is confirmed, finally, because God alone is It is confirmed,
thirdly.	potest: ergo solus Deus est essentiale objectum nostræ beati- the first principle of a human being. Therefore, he alone is also the hu-
Confirm. 3. tudinis. Et confirmatur tandem, quia solus Deus est primum 125R man being’s ultimate end. Therefore, the happiness of a human being
hominis principium: ergo solus etiam est ultimus finis ejus; remains in returning to him and in the attainment of him. Read Augus-
130 ergo in reditu ad ipsum et in consecutione ejus stat hominis tine, Conf. V, c. 4, and De Trin. XIII, c. 7, and letter 57 and St. Thomas,
beatitudo. Lege Augustinum 5, Confession., capite quarto, SCG c. 37.
et decimotertio de Trinitate, capite septimo, et epistola 57, et
D. Thomam, contra Gent., cap. 37.
Proximæ
probationes, in
omni vera
beatitudine
locum habent.
5. Atque ex rationibus factis colligitur, assertionem posi- 5. And from the arguments that have been made it is gathered that The proofs just
made have a place
in every true
happiness.
135 tam veram esse, tum in beatitudine supernaturali perfecta vitæ 130R the posited assertion is true: [i] in the case of the perfect supernatural
futuræ, de qua maxime procedunt omnia dicta, et potest de happiness of the future life, concerning which all the things that were
illa peculiaris ratio reddi, quia illa beatitudo proprie respon- said are especially forceful. And a special argument can be delivered
det gratiæ, tanquam sibi connaturalis: gratia autem est quæ- concerning it: for that happiness properly answers to grace as it is con-
dam propria participatio divinæ naturæ: et ideo sicut divina natural to it. But grace is a certain proper participation of the divine
130 in ] om. A.
132 et ] om. V.

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 5, sect. 2 5
140 natura seipsa est beata, ita propria beatitudo respondens huic 135R nature. And therefore just as divine nature itself is happy, so a proper
gratiæ, consistit in conjunctione ad eamdem divinam natu- happiness responding to this grace consists in union with that same di-
ram per altissimam participationem illius visionis, qua ipsa se vine nature through the highest participation of that vision by which
fruitur: tum etiam de beatitudine supernaturali, qualis in hac he enjoys himself. [ii] In the case of the kind of supernatural happiness
vita <col. b> imperfecte haberi potest; quia solus Deus est that can be had imperfectly in this life. For God alone is to be loved
145 supra omnia diligendus, omniaque ad hunc amorem, et ad ip- 140R beyond all other things and all things should be referred to this love
sius Dei consecutionem referenda sunt, ut vere pertineant ad and to the attainment of God himself in order for them to truly belong
nostram perfectionem: tum denique de felicitate, seu beati- to our perfection. Finally, [iii] in the case of the felicity or natural hap-
tudine naturali, quæ habere posset vel in hac vita, vel in an- piness which can be had either in this life or in the separated soul on
ima separata propter eamdem rationem, nam etiamsi homo es- account of the same reason. For even if a human being had been made
150 set conditus in puris naturalibus, deberet Deum supra omnia 145R in accordance to purely natural [states], he ought to love God beyond
diligere, et in eum ut in ultimum finem omnia referre. all other things and to refer all things to him as to an ultimate end.
An realis
existentia
pertineat ad
objectum
beatitudinis.
Quorundam
placitum negans.
6. Sed dubitabit hic aliquis, an Deus sit objectum nostræ 6. But someone will doubt here whether God is the object of our Whether real
existence pertains
to the object of
happiness.
Denying pleases
certain people.
beatitudinis ut realiter existens a parte rei, vel solum ut objec- happiness as really existing on the part of the thing or only as objec-
tive existens in mente humana. Quidam enim asserunt, quod tively existing in a human mind. For some assert that although it is of
155 licet de ratione Dei, ut Deus est, sit existere, tamen si præcise 150R the nature of God as he is God to exist, still, if that which is necessary
consideretur id quod necessarium est in illo, sic non necessario for that [happiness] were precisely considered, it would not in that way
includi existentiam rei in seipso, sed solum esse objective in necessary include the existence of the thing in itself but only objective
mente. Quod per hanc conditionalem explicatur: nam si in- being in the mind. This is explained through this conditional: for if we
telligamus beatitudinem hominis consistere in visione pulchræ understand the happiness of a human being to consist in the vision of
160 imaginis, si Deus conservaret in oculo illam visionem destru- 155R a beautiful image, if God were to conserve that vision in the eye while
endo objectum in esse existentis, tam beatus maneret homo si- destroying the object with regard to the being of existence, then the hu-
cut antea; quia ex parte sua eodem modo attingeret illud objec- man being would remain just as happy as before, because for his part he
tum, atque ita realis existentia illius objecti non esset necessaria achieves that object in the same way. And thus the real existence of that
ad talem beatitudinem, sed solum objectiva: ergo si per impos- object would not be necessary for such happiness, but only objective
165 sibile fingeremus, cognitionem, aut visionem Dei manere in 160R [existence]. Therefore, if, per impossibile, we imagined that the cogni-
intellectu nostro, etiamsi Deus non existeret eodem modo, es- tion or vision of God to remain in our intellect, even if God were not to
semus beati, quia haberemus eamdem formam beatificantem: exist in that way, we would be happy because we would have the same
ergo ex præcisa ratione beatitudinis non requiritur existentia form that makes us happy. Therefore, real existence is not required in
realis in illo objecto, sed solum esse objective. Cui modo di- that object according to the precise nature of happiness, but only objec-
170 cendi videtur favere Durandus, in quarta, distinctione quadra- 165R tive being. Durandus seems to favour this way of talking in IV, dist. 46,
gesima sexta, quæstione prima, numero octavo. q. 1, n. 8.
Oppositum
convincitur.
7. Sed hæc opinio videtur mihi valde falsa, et apertam re- 7. But this opinion seems to me very false and involving an obvious The opposite is
demonstrated.	pugnantiam involvens, quia Deus est objectum nostræ beati- repugnance, because God is the object of our happiness, insofar as the
tudinis, quatenus est primum ens ac purissimus actus et per- is the first being and most pure and perfect act. Therefore, it is neces-
175 fectissimus: ergo necesse est ut in ejus ratione, etiam ut objec- 170R sary that in his nature—also as he is the object of such happiness—there
149–150 esset ] om. V.

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 5, sect. 2 6
tum est talis beatitudinis, includatur quod sit ens necessarium is included that he is a necessary being through essence and for that
per essentiam, atque adeo quod includat, non solum objecti- reason that he includes not only objective but real and true essence.
vam, sed realem, et veram essentiam: quin potius in hoc ob- Indeed, rather, these two are not separable in this object, because that
jecto non sunt hæc duo separabilia, quia illud, quod maxime which is especially cognized concerning him or is seen in him is that
180 de illo cognoscitur, aut in ipso videtur, est quod existat, et 175R he exists and that this is his being. And therefore although perhaps in
sit suum esse: et ideo etsi fortasse in aliis rebus, et præsertim other things and especially in sensible objects God can bring it about
in objectis sensibilibus posset fieri a Deo ut maneat intuitiva that the intuitive vision remain without the real existence of the object,
<51> visio sine reali existentia objecti, tamen in hac Dei vi- nevertheless, in this vision of God it involves a manifest contradiction.
sione manifestam contradictionem involvit, non solum quia ex Not only because it is repugnant on the part of God not to be, but also
185 parte Dei repugnat non esse, sed etiam, quia ex parte visionis 180R because on the part of vision it is repugnant to remain and not to be ter-
repugnat manere, et non terminari ad ens necessario existens minated in a being necessarily existing as such. Indeed, also in the case
ut sic: imo etiam in cognitione abstractiva Dei, quæ vera sit et of abstractive cognition of God, which is true and scientific, it is repug-
scientifica, repugnat esse, et non fieri circa ens quoddam neces- nant for it to be and not to take place concerning a certain necessary
sarium, quod a se essentialiter existat. being which essentially exists from itself.
190	Ad 1. rationem
dubitandi in
num. 1.
8. Ad rationes dubii in principio positas. Ad primam fate- 185R 8. To the reasons for doubting posited in the beginning. In re- To the first
reason for
doubting in n. 1.
mur, ad completum statum beatitudinis requiri alia bona: illa sponse to the first we admit that other goods are required for the com-
tamen non sunt proprie objecta essentialis beatitudinis, quia plete state of happiness. Nevertheless, they are not properly objects of
nec sunt finis ultimus, nec pars ejus, sed ad aliud ut finem essential happiness, because they are not the ultimate end nor parts of
ultimum ordinantur, et ab illo quasi a primo fonte originem it, but are ordered to something else as to an ultimate end and from
195	Ad secundam. ducunt. Ad alteram vero rationem dubii similiter respondetur, 190R that, as it were, they draw out the origin from the first font. But it is re- To the second.
ad summum probare aliquid creatum requiri ex parte nostra, ut sponded similarly to the other reason for doubt: at most it proves that
ipso Deo perfecti efficiamur beati, quid autem illud sit, et quæ something created is required on our part so that we can be made per-
alia bona in beatitudine requirantur ad completum statum ejus, fectly happy by God himself. Moreover, what that is and what other
postea est latius explicandum in singulis beatitudinis statibus. goods are required with respect to happiness for its complete state needs
195R to be explained more thoroughly afterwards with regard to each indi-
vidual state of happiness.
191 illa ] om. V.

-- 6 of 6 --
