Last revision: April 16, 2013	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 4, SECT. 21
© Sydney Penner 2011
<41, col. b>2
Utrum ostendi possit beatitudinem hominis esse possibilem, aut Whether it can be shown that human happiness is possible or is going to
futuram esse? be.
Arguitur pro
neg. parte.
1. Ratio dubii est, quia perfecta beatitudo repugnat cum im- 1. The reason for doubt is that perfect happiness is incompatible with It is argued for
the negative side.	perfectione humanæ naturæ: quomodo ergo ostendi potest the imperfection of human nature. Therefore, how can it be shown
5 humanam naturam esse capacem tantæ perfectionis? An- 5R that human nature is capable of such perfection? The antecedent is
tecedens declaratur primo, quia beatitudo, ut diximus, re- shown first, because happiness, as we said, requires a collection of all
quirit collectionem omnium bonorum, et excludit omnia goods and excludes every bad. But a human by his nature is subject to
mala: homo autem natura sua subjectus est multis malis, et many bads and miseries which cannot be avoided. Second, and prin-
miseriis, quæ vitare non potest. Secundo, et principaliter, cipally, because part of happiness and a necessary road to its acquisi-
10 quia pars beatitudinis, et via necessaria ad illam consecu- 10R tion, is to will no bad things or to be free from sin, which a human
tionem, est nihil mali velle, seu carere peccato, quod non by his nature cannot be, since he exists with contrary affects that fight
potest homo sua natura, cum constet contrariis affectibus, et among themselves. Third, because happiness is eternal of its nature,
inter se pugnantibus. Tertio, quia de ratione beatitudinis est for he who fears losing the good which he has cannot be happy. But a
æternitas, nam qui timet carere bono, quod habet, non potest human as human is not everlasting by his nature. Therefore.
15 esse beatus; sed homo, ut homo, non est perpetuus natura 15R Perhaps someone will say that this whole arguments only works An evasion is
blocked.	Euasio
præcluditur.
sua: ergo. Dicet fortasse aliquis, hanc rationem totam solum concerning happiness taken in the first way as signifying a collection
procedere de beatitudine priori modo accepta, ut significat of all goods, but not concerning the essence of happiness. But to the
collectionem bonorum omnium, non vero de essentia beati- contrary, although the whole collection of goods does not belong to
tudinis. Sed contra hoc est, quia licet tota collectio bonorum the essence of happiness, it is, nevertheless, essential to the nature of
20 non sit de essentia beatitudinis, tamen de ratione beatitudi- 20R happiness that it brings [them] with it and requires that perfect state.
nis essentialis est, ut secum afferat, et postulet statum illum Therefore, it requires a subject capable of that state.
perfectum: ergo requirit subjectum capax illius status.
Quæ hic
disputetur
difficultas.
2. In hac quæstione agere possumus solum formaliter de 2. In this question we can deal [i] only formally concerning hap- Which difficulty
is being disputed
here.
beatitudine prout a nobis definita est, an homo sit capax illius, piness as it was defined by us, whether a human being has the capacity
25 vel materialiter, seu in particulari, an cognosci possit qua re et for it, or [ii] materially or in particular, whether it can be known by
quo modo beatificandus sit homo: et hoc modo tractat illam 25R what and in what way a human being should be made happy. Scotus
Scotus in 4, dist. 49, quæst. 2, et contendit, posse ratione nat- discusses it in the latter way in Sent. IV, dist. 49, q. 2, and contends that
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not
always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 2 2
urali probari esse hominem capacem beatitudinis consistentis it can be shown by natural reason that a human being has the capac-
in visione Dei: quam quidem sententiam ego falsam existimo: ity for happiness consisting in the vision of God. As a matter of fact,
30 sed non potest hic ex professe probari, donec ratio et natura I consider this view false. But this cannot be expressly proven until
illius beatitudinis magis cognita sit: et ideo in priori tantum 30R the ratio and nature of that happiness is better known. For this rea-
sensu breviter est hæc quæstio expedienda, in qua præterea son, this question should be resolved briefly only in the former sense.
potest esse sermo aut de capacitate tantum, aut etiam de facto In this, furthermore, the discussion can be either about the capacity
an possit probari, hominem aliquando posse consequi beati- alone or also about whether it can be proven that in fact a human be-
35 tudinem suam. Denique in hoc procedere quæstio potest, aut ing can at some point achieve his happiness. Finally, the question can
ex principiis revelatis, aut ex solis principiis naturæ. 35R proceed in this either from revealed principles or from principles of
nature alone.
1. Assertio, de
fide.
3. Dico ergo primo secundum fidem: Certum est homi- 3. I speak first, then, in accordance with the faith: It is certain that The first
assertion: from
faith.
nem esse capacem absolutæ et <42> perfectæ beatitudinis, et a human being is capable of absolute and perfect happiness and will
de facto consecuturum illam. Probatur, quia Deus in Scrip- in fact achieve it. It is proven, because God promised this happiness
40 tura sacra promisit hanc beatitudinem omnibus, ut per se 40R to everyone in holy Scripture, as is clear in itself. But his promise
constat: hæc autem promissio supponit in homine capaci- assumes a capacity in the human for receiving it, since God does not
tatem ad recipiendam illam, quia Deus non promittit impossi- promise impossible things.
bilia. Rursus quamvis Deus non promittat hanc beatitudinem On the other hand, since God does not promise this happiness
omnibus absolute, sed justis, et consequenter promissio re- to everyone absolutely but promises it to the just, consequently the
45 spectu omnium non sit absoluta, sed conditionata, scilicet, 45R promise is not absolute with respect to everyone, but conditional,
si in justitia decesserit: tamen et ex eadem sacra Scriptura, et namely, ‘if he departed in justice’. Nevertheless, both from the same
ex aliis regulis fidei, constat et posse, et de facto impleri hanc holy Scripture and from other rules of the faith, it is clear both that
conditionem in multis hominibus. Quod denique illa sit beat- this condition can be and in fact is fulfilled in many humans. Finally,
itudo absoluta et perfecta, constat ex modo, quo de illa lo- that this is absolute and perfect happiness is clear from the way in
50 quitur, et ex his, quæ de illa docet, vocat enim illam superem- 50R which it is spoken of and from the things that [Scripture] teaches con-
inens bonum, quod nec oculus vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cerning it. For it calls it a super-eminent good ‘that neither the eye has
cor hominis ascendit, vocat æternum gloriæ pondus, æternum seen nor the ear has heard nor the heart of man ascended’; it calls it
gaudium, quod negat omne malum, et omnem tristitiam, et ‘the weight of eternal glory’, ‘eternal joy’, that denies every bad and
alia similia, quæ postea videbimus. every sadness and everything similar, which we will see later.
55	2. Assertio. 4. Dico secundo, ex principiis naturæ probari potest, 55R 4. I say, second, that it can be proven from the principles of na- The second
assertion.
The first proof.
1. Probatio. hominem esse capacem alicujus beatitudinis. Probatur primo ture that a human is capable of some happiness. It is shown first from
experimento ipso, nihil enim magis receptum fuit apud omnes experience itself, for nothing was more received by all the philoso-
philosophos, quamvis enim de re, in qua consistit beatitudo phers. For although there was infinite dissension among them con-
humana, fuerit inter illos infinita dissensio ut sequenti dis- cerning the thing in which human happiness consists, as I will touch
60 putatione attingam: tamen quod aliqua sit beatitudo homi- 60R on in the following disputation, yet that something is the happiness
nis fuit summa consensio, et ita hoc sumit tanquam primum of a human was the highest consensus. And thus this can be taken as
fundamentum moralis philosophiæ Aristotelis, in 1, Ethic. the first foundation of Aristotle’s moral philosophy in EN I. Second, The second.
39–40 Scriptura sacra ] sacra Scriptura V.

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 2 3
Secunda. Secundo declaratur ratione in superioribus tacta, quia homo it is shown by the argument given in previous sections. For a human
habet aliquem finem ultimum: ergo potest illum consequi, being has some ultimate end. Therefore, he can achieve that; other-
65 alias frustra et insipienter ordinaretur in illum: sed consecu- 65R wise, he would have been ordered to it in vain and foolishly. But the
tio finis ultimi est beatitudo: ergo. achievement of the ultimate end is happiness. Therefore.
Instantia. 5. Dices, hac ratione probaretur bruta esse beatitudinis 5. You will say that by this argument is proven that non-rational An objection.
capacia, quia etiam habent suum finem ultimum, et possunt animals have the capacity for happiness, because they also have their
pervenire ad suam ultimam perfectionem. Scotus supra re- ultimate end and can reach their ultimate perfection. Scotus above
70 spondet esse aliquo modo capacia cujusdam beatitudinis im- 70R responds they have in some way a capacity for a certain imperfect
perfectæ: tamen Aristoteles 10, Ethicor., cap. 8 et 9, et Au- happiness. Nevertheless, Aristotle in EN X, c. 8 and 9, and Augustine,
gustinus, quem nuper citavi, simpliciter negant bruta esse ca- whom we just cited, simply deny that non-rational animals have the
pacia beatitudinis, et Gregorius Nyssenus, in lib. de Beatitu- capacity for happiness and Gregory of Nyssa says in The Beatitudes
dinibus, dicit, hominem esse capacem beatitudinis, quia est that a human being is capable of happiness because he is [made] in
75 ad imaginem Dei, quod est proprium intellectualis naturæ: 75R the image of God, which is proper to intellectual nature. Therefore, It is resolved.
Expeditur. igitur secundæ rationi factæ addendum est ex D. Thoma 1, 2, one should add to the second argument that was made3, drawing from
quæst. [1], art. [8], quamvis Deus sit finis ultimus omnium, St. Thomas [ST ] IaIIæ.[1.8], that although God is the ultimate end
non tamen eodem modo, quia non eodem modo potest at- for all things, he is not, nevertheless, the ultimate end in the same
tingi ab omnibus: homo enim potest suis actibus immediate way for all things, since he cannot be reached in the same way by all
80 attingere <col. b> Deum cognoscendo et amando: et ideo 80R things. For a human being can by his actions immediately attain God
potest proprie consequi illum finem, atque adeo potest pro- by knowing and loving him, and therefore he can properly acquire
prie esse beatus: nam, ut recte dixit Scotus, beatitudo signi- that end. For this reason, he can properly be happy. For, as Scotus
ficat consecutionem optimi, atque ultimi boni simpliciter: at rightly said, happiness signifies the acquisition of the best and ultimate
vero animalia bruta non possunt attingere Deum immediate good strictly speaking. But, non-rational animals, on the other hand,
85 suis actionibus, sed solum aliquam perfectionem creatam qua 85R cannot reach God immediately by their actions, but only some created
aliquo modo imitentur Deum, et ideo non possunt consequi perfection by which they in some way imitate God, and therefore
illum finem ultimum secundum se, et ideo non sunt capacia they cannot acquire that ultimate end according to itself. For this
beatitudinis: et hinc est quod homo dicitur immediate crea- reason, they are not capable of happiness. This is the reason that a
tus propter Deum, aliæ vero inferiores creaturæ sunt immedi- human being is said to be created immediately for the sake of God,
90 ate propter ipsum hominem, et per illum ultimate tendunt in 90R but other lower creatures are said to be created immediately for the
Confirmatio. Deum. Et confirmatur hæc ratio ex naturali appetitu hominis sake of human beings and through them ultimately tend to God.
ad beatitudinem, hic enim innatus est omnibus hominibus, ut And this argument is confirmed by a human being’s natural ap- A confirmation.
dicturi sumus late in fine hujus materiæ, et frequenter dispu- petite for happiness, for this is innate to all humans, as we will soon
tat Augustinus, libro primo, de libero Arbitr., capite decimo- discuss more broadly at the end of this material and as Augustine fre-
95 quarto, et lib. de Vita beata, et lib. 10, Confess., cap. 20, et 95R quently argues (De libero arbitrio I, c. 14; De vita beata; Conf. X, c. 20;
3In the previous paragraph.
77 1 ] 5 A V.
77 8 ] 2 A 1 V.
77 Deus ] om. V.

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 2 4
in Enchirid., cap. 25, sed appetitus naturalis fundatur in natu- and Ench. c. 25). But natural desire is founded in natural capacity and
rali capacitate, et non tendit nisi in rem aliquo modo naturæ does not tend to anything except to something in some way possible
possibilem, quia appetitus naturalis est naturæ consentaneus: for that nature, since natural desire is appropriate to nature. There-
ergo beatitudo, quæ est objectum hujus appetitus, est res pos- fore, happiness, which is the object of this desire, is a possible thing
100 sibilis homini cujus ipse est capax natura sua. 100R for a human, [something] of which he is capable by his nature.
3. Assertio. 6. Dico tertio, ex principiis etiam naturæ potest huma- 6. I say, third, that it can be shown even from the principles of na- The third
assertion.	nis rationibus satis congruentibus ostendi humanam speciem ture by sufficiently congruent human reasons that the human species
Explicatur. fore aliquando beatificandam. Loquor de specie humana, will sometimes be made happy. I speak of the human species, because It is explained.
quia non est necesse ut in omnibus suis individuis conse- it is not necessary that each and every individual achieve his end. Be-
105 quatur suum finem; quia cum multiplicatio individuorum sit 105R cause when the multiplication of individuals is in a certain way per ac-
quodammodo per accidens, non est inconveniens aliqua de- cidens, it is not disagreeable that someone is turned aside from his end,
flectere a suo fine, præsertim quia cum homo sit liberi arbi- especially because when a human has freewill, it can result through
trii, per eum stare potest quominus suum finem consequatur: that that his end is not achieved. Therefore, it will be sufficient that
satis ergo erit quod in aliquibus individuis hæc species suum this species obtain its end in some individuals.
110	Probatur triplici
capite.
finem obtineat. Hoc autem probari potest, quia ad conve- 110R Moreover, this can be proven, because it belongs to the agreeable It is proven from
three sources.	nientem providentiam auctoris naturæ spectat ita gubernare providence of the author of nature to govern and direct each nature
et dirigere singulas naturas in suos fines ut non omnino il- to his end such that it is not wholly frustrated for them. First, indeed, The first.
Primo. lis frustretur: primo quidem, quia viderentur frustra creati because created human beings would seem to be frustrated on account
homines propter talem finem, si nunquam neque in ullo indi- of such an end, if no individual were ever able to achieve it. For what
115 viduo illum essent consecuturi: quid enim prodesset hominis 115R would be the use of a capacity for human happiness if it were never
Secundo. capacitas beatitudinis, si nunquam esset implenda? Secundo, fulfilled?
quia id, quod nunquam accidit in omnibus individuis alicu- Second, because that which never happens in any individual of The second.
jus speciei etiamsi quamplurima multiplicentur, merito dici some species even if they are multiplied as far as possible, is deservedly
potest impossibile, si non omnino physice, seu metaphysice, called impossible—if not entirely physically or metaphysically impos-
120 saltem moraliter, et humano modo loquendo: pertinet autem 120R sible, at least impossible morally and in a human way of speaking.
ad providen- <43> tiam auctoris naturæ, et quodammodo Moreover, it belongs to the providence of the author of nature and in
debitum est ipsi humanæ naturæ ita dirigi in suum finem, ut a certain way it must be that human nature is directed to its end in
Tertio. possit illum consequi. Tertio possumus etiam uti ratione, qua such a way that it can achieve it.
Chrysostomus et alii Patres sæpe utuntur ad probandam res- Thirdly, we can also use the argument which Chrysostom and The third.
125 urrectionem, nam quidam homines totam vitam in vitiis, et 125R other Fathers often use to prove the resurrection, for certain humans
in peccatis transigunt, alii honeste vivunt: pertinet ergo ad complete an entire life in vices and sins but others live righteously
providentiam auctoris naturæ illos punire, hos remunerare: (honeste). Therefore, it belongs to the providence of the author of
ergo respondere debet operibus virtutis aliquod beatitudinis nature to punish the former and to reward the latter. Therefore, some
præmium. prize ought to answer virtuous actions.
130	Instantiæ
occurritur.
7. Dices, absolute loquendo, potuisse Deum ita gu- 130R 7. You will say that, speaking absolutely, God was able to govern An objection
comes up.	bernare humanas res, ut nullus hominum ad beatitudinem human affairs in such a way that no human would attain happiness,
perveniret, permittendo omnes labi in peccatum, et in eo du- permitting everyone to fall into sin and to harden in it all the way to
rare usque ad finem vitæ, sicut multis speciebus Angelorum the end of life, just as it is believed happened to many species of angels.

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 2 5
evenisse creditur. Respondetur: ideo non dixi rationes factas It is responded that it was for that reason not said that the arguments
135 esse demonstrationes, sed morales rationes multum suadentes 135R made were demonstrations but moral reasons greatly persuading and
et ostendentes modum providentiæ maxime consentaneum showing the mode of providence most appropriate to divine wisdom
divinæ sapientiæ et bonitati. Unde licet non negemus po- and goodness. Hence, although we do not deny that God could bring
tuisse Deum id facere de potentia absoluta; negamus tamen id that about by absolute power, we do, nonetheless, deny that it would
esse satis consentaneum et naturis rerum, et convenienti or- be appropriate both to the natures of things and to the agreeable order
140 dini universi. Ad exemplum autem Angelorum respondetur, 140R of the universe.
illud supponere omnes Angelos esse specie diversos, et in sin- To the example of the angels, moreover, is responded that it as-
gulis speciebus tantum esse unum individuum: quo admisso, sumes that every angel is a different species and that there is only one
non est similis ratio, quia non poterat species angelica per- individual in each species. By that having been admitted, it is not a
mitti peccare, et cadere a suo fine, quin omnia individua ejus- similar argument, because an angelic species could not be permitted
145 dem speciei permitterentur eodem modo cadere, quia suppo- 145R to sin and to fall from its end without every individual of that species
nunt non esse multa, sed unum, et alioquin fuit conveniens being permitted in the same way to fall. For there is assumed to be
etiam Angelos permitti suæ libertati, et ideo in illis censetur only one individual, not multiple ones. And besides, it was agreeable
illud non esse inconveniens, quia omnes conveniunt in eodem also to permit the angels their freedom, and therefore the former is
gradu, et in eodem modo tendendi in suum finem: homines not considered disagreeable in them, since they all belong to the same
150 autem habent suum proprium modum, et quodammodo spe- 150R grade and they all tend in the same way to their end. Human beings,
cialem gradum constituunt. howover, have their own way and in a certain way constitute a special
grade.
Ad argum. in
num. 1.
8. Ad rationem dubitandi in principio positam proce- 8. To the reason for doubting given in the beginning, we make To the argument
in n. 1.	dendo ex principiis revelatis dicimus duo: Primum est, non two points proceeding from revealed principles. The first is that a
posse hominem suæ naturæ viribus, aut per naturales causas 155R human being cannot through his natural strengths or through natu-
155 illum felicem statum consequi. Secundum est, in hac vita ral causes achieve that felicitous state. The second is that in this life
omnino non posse ad illum pervenire, etiam per auxilia he cannot wholly reach that, even through the help of grace in ac-
gratiæ secundum legem ordinariam. Nihilominus satis est, cordance with the ordinary law. Nonetheless, it is sufficient that that
illum statum fore aliquando possibilem homini cum divina state will be possible for a human being at some point with divine
ope, et auxilio. Procedendo autem ex principiis naturæ, dice- 160R power and help.
160 mus similiter duo sumpta ex Aristotele. Primum est, beati- Moreover, proceeding from principles of nature, we may simi-
tudinem possibilem homini secundum naturam suam esse im- larly make two points taken from Aristotle. The first is that the hap-
perfectam, non tamen omnino nullam. Et hoc est, quod Aris- piness possible for a human being in accordance with his nature is
toteles dixit 1, Ethic., c. 10, <col. b> posse nos esse beatos, imperfect and yet not wholly nothing. And this is what Aristotle says
tamen ut homines. Unde non est de essentia cujuscumque 165R in EN I, c. 10: we can be happy still as humans. Hence it is not of the
165 beatitudinis, ut absolute et simpliciter excludat omnem de- essence of whatever happiness that it absolutely and strictly speaking
fectum, sed primo et per se est de ejus essentia, ut sit conse- exclude every defect, but it is primarily and essentially of its essence
cutio ultimi finis: consequenter vero habet ut excludat omne that it is the attainment of the ultimate end. But consequently it holds
malum, quantum fieri poterit, juxta subjecti capacitatem. Se- so that it excludes every bad insofar as that will be able to happen in

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 4, sec. 2 6
cundum est, quod Aristoteles dixit 10, Ethic., cap. 7, talis vita 170R accordance with the capacity of the subject. The second is what Aris-
170 superat hominis naturam, non enim hoc ipso quo homo est totle says in EN X, c. 7: such a life surpasses human nature, for ‘it is
ita vivit, sed quo est quid in ipso divinum, id est, quatenus not insofar as he is human that one lives like this, but insofar as there
mentem habet et immortalem animam, in qua posset homo is something divine in him’. That is, insofar as he has a mind and an
perpetuam beatitudinem consequi, et carere temporalibus in- immortal soul, in which the human being can achieve everlasting hap-
commodis, et aliquo modo satiari juxta naturæ capacitatem. 175R piness and be free from temporal disadvantages and in some way be
satisfied in accordance with the capacity of his nature.
169 10 ] 1 V.

-- 6 of 6 --
