Sydney Penner
Last revised: November 27, 2008
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE VOLUNTARIO ET INVOLUNTARIO, DISP. 91
Appendix: DE LEGIBUS, LIB. 7, CAP. 1, N. 2
<266, col. a>
DE USU ET IMPERIO
Diximus de actibus pertinentibus ad ordinem in- We spoke about the acts belong to the order of inten-
tentionis, nunc breviter de his, qui ad ordinem tion. Now [we will speak] briefly about those which
executionis pertinent, de quibus D. Thomas 1, 2, belong to the order of execution, concerning which
quæst. 16 et 17. St. Thomas [speaks] in [ST ] IaIIæ.16–17.
SECTIO I
WHAT USE IS AND WHAT ITS OBJECT IS (Quid sit usus, et quod ejus objectum)
1. Variæ usurpationes usus.—Usus apud theolo- 1. Different usages of use.—Setting aside the other
gos, omissis aliis significationibus, a fruitione dis- significations, use is distinguished from enjoyment
tinguitur, et illi quasi opponitur, ex Augustino, (fruitione) among the theologians and is, as it were,
de doctr. Christiana, cap. 3, ubi ait, uti esse id, opposed to it. [This is taken] from Augustine in De
quod in usu venit, ad id, quod amas obtinen- doctr. Chr., cap. 3, where he says that to use is to re-
dum, referre. Nota tamen, in re amata propter fer that which comes in use to the obtaining of that
aliam posse versari et electionem et facultatem which you love. Note, nevertheless, that in execut-
etiam aliquam inferiorem eam rem exequendo; ing that thing both election and also some lower fac-
et in hoc ultimo consistit, vel perficitur usus : et ulty can be directed to the thing loved for the sake
ideo D. Thomas dixit, usum significare applica- of something else. And use consists in or completes
tionem ad operandum. Sciendum autem est, ap- the latter. And therefore St. Thomas said that use sig-
plicationem potentiæ exequentis non habere ra- nifies the application to acting. It should be known,
tionem usus, nisi ut est actio voluntaria ad finem however, that the application of the executing power
ab ipso operante relata, et ideo bruta non utun- does not have the nature of use except insofar as it is
tur proprie : quapropter in ipsomet usu distin- a voluntary act related to the end by the one acting
gui debet et actio exterior ipsius potentiæ, quæ himself. And therefore brute animals do not properly
ad exequendum opus applicatur, et actio inte- use. For this reason there must be distinguished in the
rior illius potentiæ, quæ exteriorem applicat. Di- very use itself both an exterior act of that power which
cunt ergo quidam, usum proprie esse illam ac- is applied to executing the work and an interior act
<col. b> tionem externam, et ideo, usum non of that power which applies the exterior [act]. Cer-
esse actum elicitum a voluntate, sed imperatum. tain people, therefore, say that use, properly speaking,
Alii vero cum D. Thoma dicunt interiorem illam is that external act, and, therefore, use is not an act
actionem esse usum : et consequenter dicunt esse elicited by the will but commanded. But others say
elicitam a voluntate. Sed forte dissentio est in with St. Thomas that that interior act is use and con-
verbis, nam in re constat usum compleri in ipsa sequently they say that it is elicited by the will. But
1Latin text is from vol. 4 of the Vivès edition.

-- 1 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 2
executione. Certum etiam est, præcedere ante is- perhaps the disagreement is verbal, for it is agreed that
tam executionem aliquem actum interiorem ap- in reality use is completed in the execution itself. Also,
petitus, qui est causa exterioris actionis humanæ. it is certain that that execution is preceded by some in-
Quare non mihi displicet illa distinctio commu- terior act of appetite, which is the cause of the exterior
nis usus in activum, et passivum, juxta quam. human action. This is why that common distinction
is not displeasing to me according to which use [is di-
vided] into active and passive.
2. Prima assertio.—Dico primo : usus activus est 2. First assertion.—I say first that active use is an act
actus elicitus a voluntate. Probatur, quia voluntas elicited by the will. It is proven since the will is that
est, quæ movet cæteras potentias ad operandum which moves the remaining powers to action. But it
: sed non movet, nisi per actum ab ipsa volun- does not move, except through an act elicited by the
tate elicitum : ergo per illum utitur inferioribus will itself. Therefore, it uses the lower powers and
potentiis, et actibus earum; imo et intellectu et their acts through that [act]. Indeed, [it uses] both
se ipsa, quatenus se ipsam applicat ad exercitium the intellect and it itself to the extent that it applies
actus. itself to the exercise of the act.
3. Secunda assertio.—Dico secundo : usus pas- 3. Second assertion.—I say secondly that passive use is
sivus est in exteriori potentia exequente. Patet, in the exterior executing power. It is clear because it is
quia est usus procedens ab usu activo : et ideo the use proceeding from the active use. And therefore
dicitur passivus, quamvis respectu ipsius rei exte- it is called passive, although with respect to the exte-
rioris, vel interioris extrinsece habeat quamdam rior or interior matter itself it can extrinsically have
actionem activam : sic enim motione manus utor a certain active action. For thus I use a reed with the
calamo, et dici potest activus secundarius : vide motion of my hand and it can be called secondarily ac-
Durandum, in 1, d. 1. Sed dices, etiam actus ap- tive. See Durandus in 1, d. 1. But, you may say, an
petitus sensitivi habet rationem usus. Responde- act of the sensitive appetite also has the nature of use.
tur breviter : in homine hic appetitus non potest It is responded briefly: in a human being this appetite
movere alias potentias nisi consentiente volun- cannot move other powers except by the will agree-
tate : et ideo consequens usus tribuitur voluntati, ing. And therefore the following use is attributed to
præcipue moraliter. Et præterea usus, ut supra the will, especially morally. And, in addition, use, as I
dici, proprie importat actum perfecte voluntar- say above, properly conveys a perfectly voluntary act.
ium : et propterea ipsamet motio appetitus sensi- And, therefore, the very motion itself of the sensitive
tivi non habet rationem usus, nisi ut subest vol- appetite does not have the nature of use, except insofar
untati. Et his facile definitur, quod sit objectum as it is underneath the will. And what the object is of
hujus actus. this act is easily defined from these.
4. Tertia assertio.—Unde dico tertio : usus pro- 4. Third assertion.—Hence, I say thirdly that use is
prie est de mediis. Est D. Thomæ, et omnium properly of means. [This] is [the view] of St. Thomas
ex Augustino supra, et probatur ex vi nomi- and everyone else [taken] from Augustine above and
nis : nam usus significat motum quemdam. Et it is shown by the method of names. For use signi-
confirmatur; nam usus versatur immediate circa fies a certain motion. And it is confirmed: for use is
nostras actiones humanas, quæ sunt media ad immediately engaged with our human actions which
cognoscendum ultimum finem ex Augustino 11, are means to cognizing the ultimate end, according to
de Civitate, cap. 25. Et ex hoc colligitur pro- Augustine, De Civ., cap. 25. And from this is gath-
prie, et immediate usum, qui est actus voluntatis, ered that properly and immediately use, which is an
versari circa interiores potentias, et actiones ho- act of the will, is engaged with the interior powers
minis; quia est applicatio potentiarum ad opus : and actions of a human being, since it is an applica-
tamen ex consequenti, et mediate versatur circa tion of powers to work. Yet by consequence and me-
res exteriores, prout eas ad nostras actiones or- diately it is engaged with exterior matters as we order
dinamus, vel prout sunt materia nostrarum ac- them to our actions or as they are the matter of our
tionum : quapropter nulla re uti dicimur, nisi actions. For this reason, we are said to use nothing

-- 2 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 3
subjecta sit <267> nostræ voluntati. Quod variis unless the subject is our will. This can happen in dif-
modis contingere potest, nam aliquando subjici- ferent ways, for sometimes it is made the subject as
tur tanquam instrumentum; aliquando tanquam an instrument, sometimes as the matter, or sometimes
materia, vel objectum; aliquando solum, quia est the object alone, since that thing is suitable for us.
nobis illa res commoda.
5. Sed objices; nam sequitur, nos non posse 5. But you will object, for it follows, contra Augus-
uti Deo contra Augustinum. Probatur, quia est tine, that we cannot use God. It is proven, since he is
nobis valde utilis; et possumus illum diligere most useful to us and we can love him for the sake of
propter nostrum commodum. Confirmatur our advantage. It is confirmed, first, for the blessed at
primo; nam beati saltem dicuntur uti Deo tan- least are said to use God as the object and mirror in
quam objecto et speculo, in quo omnia vident. whom they see everything. It is confirmed, secondly,
Confirmatur secundo, nam utimur sole, et Ange- for we use the sun, and angels also, yet these things are
lis etiam; quæ tamen res non subsunt nostræ vol- not underneath our will.
untati. Respondetur ad argumentum primum, It is responded to the first argument that we do
nos non uti Deo, sed possumus uti actionibus not use God but we can use actions concerning God,
circa Deum, id est, amore secundo. Aliud est, that is, amor secundus. The one is that God is useful
Deum esse utilem nobis, et ideo amari; quod in- to us and is loved for that reason. This can sometimes
terdum fieri potest amore etiam honesto, licet happen even by an honest love although not by a per-
non perfecto. Aliud est uti Deo, quod fieri recte fect love. The other is to use God. This cannot happen
non potest; tum quia non est in potestate ho- rightly, since it is not in the power of a human being
minis, applicari Deum ad efficiendum id quod that God be applied to effecting that which is useful
sibi est utile; tum etiam quia licet amor Dei pos- to him and also since—although the love of God can
sit referri proprie in nostram utilitatem, tamen be referred, strictly speaking, to our utility—it cannot
non ultimate, sed tandem debet terminari in ip- [be referred] ultimately [to our utility] but in the end
summet Deum. Unde ad confirmationem re- must be terminated in God himself. Hence it is re-
spondetur, beatos non proprie uti Deo : præ- sponded to the confirmation that the blessed do not
cipue quia operationes, quas beati exercent circa strictly speaking use God, especially since the actions
Deum, sunt necessariæ, quæ tamen, ut ex dictis which the blessed exercise concerning God are neces-
patet, debent esse liberæ. Ad confirmationem sary, yet which, as is clear from what was said, ought
secundam respondetur, non esse locutiones illas to be free. To the second confirmation is responded
adeo proprias : omnes tamen dicunt ordinem that those locutions are not truly proper. Neverthe-
ad nostram voluntatem, et operationes : utor less, they call everything an ordering to our will and
enim sole quatenus est in potestate mea, non il- actions. For I use the sun insofar as it is in my power,
lum mihi, sed me illi applicare : et quodammodo not to apply it to me, but to apply me to it. And in a
utimur Angelis, quia volumus juvari orationibus, certain way we use angels, since we wish to be assisted
vel auxilio eorum. by their prayers or help.
SECTIO II
WHETHER USE IS AN ACT DISTINCT FROM ELECTION (Utrum usus sit actus ab electione distinctus)
1. Prima sententia.—Prima sententia negat, ita 1. The first view.—The first view denies [that use is
Aureolus apud Capreolum, in 1, d. 1, q. 2. an act distinct from election]. Aureol [does] so be-
Fundamentum est, quia habent idem objectum, fore Capreolus in [Sent.] I, d. 1, q. 2. The foundation
nempe bonum propter aliud appetendum. Con- is that they have the same object, namely the good
firmatur, nam supra dixi, electionem esse volun- desired for the sake of another. It is confirmed, for
tatem efficacem, ex qua sequitur opus. Sed hæc as I said above, election is an efficacious willing from
eadem est ratio usus : ergo, etc. which a work follows. But the nature of use is the
same as this. Therefore, etc.

-- 3 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 4
2. Secunda sententia.—Secunda sententia commu- 2. The second view.—The second view common among
nis Thomistarum est hos actus ex propriis ra- the Thomists is that these acts are always distinct by
tionibus semper esse distinctos : fundamentum reason of their proper natures. The foundation is that
est, quia electio est quasi simplex voluntas, et in- election is, as it were, a simple willing and intention
tentio circa finem : usus autem <col. b> non sic. concerning the end. Use, however, is not like that.
Confirmatur primo, quia electio sequitur imme- It is confirmed, first, since election follows immedi-
diate post judicium consilii, et antecedit execu- ately after the judgement of counsel and precedes ex-
tionem, usus vero non est, nisi in executione ipsa, ecution. But use does not exist except in the execu-
unde non sequitur immediate post judicium, sed tion itself. Hence, it does not follow immediately after
post electionem, et imperium. Confirmatur se- judgement, but after election and command. It is con-
cundo : nam usus non proprie versatur circa firmed, secondly, for use is not properly engaged with
medium, sicut electio, sed circa potentiam exe- means, as election is, but with the executing power
quentem, quod ad opus applicat. that is applied to the work.
3. Nota, electionem duobus modis posse fieri : Note that election can happen in two ways. In one
uno modo quasi abstractive, determinando scil- way abstractively, as it were, namely, by determin-
icet medium, non tamen omnes particulares cir- ing the means yet not all the particular circumstances,
cumstantias, scilicet hic et nunc, et hoc modo ex- namely, here and now and to be executed in this way.
equendas. Secundo modo potest fieri electio cum In the second way election can happen with a com-
totali determinatione circumstantiarum particu- plete determination of all particular circumstances.
larium.
4. Dico primo. Electio cum fit priori modo, 4. I say first: when election happens in the first way,
non est usus. Hoc probant rationes secundæ it is not use. The arguments for the second view prove
sententiæ, et præcipue, quia ex vi hujus electio- this, especially since the power is not applied to use by
nis potentia non applicatur ad usum. Et de hac the strength of this election. And St. Thomas should
electione intelligendus est D. Thomas, cum 1, be understood [as speaking] about this election when
3 [sic], quæst. 16, art. 4, dicit electionem ante- he says in [ST ] IaIIæ.16.4 that election precedes use.
cedere usum : moraliter enim, et fere semper ita For morally and almost always it happens in such a
fit, ut prius fiat consilium, et electio de medio se- way that counsel happens earlier and election of the
cundum se, quam tractetur de executione : licet means follows it, which is discussed concerning execu-
interdum accidat, adeo esse breve tempus, quod tion. Although sometimes it happens that for that rea-
inter electionem et usum intercedit, ut vix per- son there is a brief time that intervenes between elec-
cipiatur. tion and use, so that it can hardly be perceived.
5. Dico tamen secundo, per se simpliciter lo- 5. I say secondly that, in itself, speaking strictly, it is
quendo, necessarium non esse electionem tem- not necessary that election precede use in time. And
pore antecedere usum : et tunc electio et usus then election and use are not acts that are really dis-
non sunt actus re distincti. Prior pars probatur, tinct. The first part is proven since nothing prevents
quia nihil impedit quominus intellectus subito the intellect from suddenly determining the means
determinet medium, et circumstantias omnes, et and all the circumstances and the will from choosing
voluntas in eodem instanti, in quo eligit medium, the circumstance and actual execution in the same in-
eligat circumstantiam et actualem executionem. stant in which it chooses the means. But the second
Secunda vero pars patet ex fundamentis primæ part is clear from the foundation of the first view and
sententiæ : et præcipue, quia ex vi talis electionis especially since the action of the executing power fol-
sequitur actio potentiæ exequentis. lows from the strength of such an election.
6. Dico igitur tertio. Electio et usus secundum 6. Therefore, I say thirdly: election and use accord-
se non videntur actus formaliter, vel essentialiter ing to themselves do not seem formally or essentially
distincti : sed frequenter differunt secundum ma- distinct acts. But frequently they differ according to
jorem, vel minorem determinationem circum- greater or lesser determination of the circumstances.

-- 4 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 5
stantiarum. Patet ex dictis, et ratio præcipua est, It is clear from what was said and an especially strong
quia ibi actus tendunt in objectum sub eadem reason is that there the acts tend to the object under
ratione boni, nempe ut est utile ad consequen- the same aspect of good, namely, insofar as it is useful
dum finem, et hoc est essentiale : illa vero alia for pursuing the good. And this is essential. But that
differentia videtur plane accidentalis. Et hoc est other difference seems plainly accidental. And this is
juxta confirmationem primæ sententiæ. Neque according to the confirmation of the first view. Nor do
obstant argumenta secundæ. the arguments for the second view stand in the way.
7. Ad fundamentum primæ [sic] sententiæ in nu- 7. To the foundation of the second view in n. 2 and
mero 2 ejusque primam confirmationem.—Quare its first confirmation.—Hence, to the foundation is re-
ad fundamentum respondetur, electio- <268> sponded that election is also engaged with means in
nem etiam versari circa medium in ordine ad ex- the order of execution. Hence, that this execution is
ecutionem : unde, quod hæc executio vel statim, determined either at once or subsequently does not
vel in posterum determinetur, non arguit differ- prove an essential difference but only more or less ac-
entiam essentialem, sed solum secundum magis cidentally. And by reason of this greater determina-
et minus accidentaliter : et ratione hujus majoris tion it happens that work follows on use and not on
determinationis fit ut ad usum sequatur opus, election, when it happens without that determination.
et non ad electionem, quando fit sine ista deter- This is because the exercise of work requires the deter-
minatione : quia exercitium operis requirit de- mination of all circumstances.
terminationem omnium circumstantiarum. Ad To the second [confirmation] is responded that
secundam respondetur ipsummet usum poten- the very use itself of the executing power is just as one
tiæ exequentis esse velut unum ex mediis nec- by the necessary means for pursuing the end. And
essariis ad consequendum finem : et ideo eam- therefore it participates in the same aspect of good and
dem rationem boni, et appetibilis participat : desirability. Hence, it does not prove an essential dif-
unde non arguit distinctionem essentialem. Se- ference. Secondly, it does not follow that it is neces-
cundo non sequitur, ad executionem operis esse sary for the execution of the work that the will directly
necessarium ut voluntas directe, et quasi in actu and, as it were, in the designated act wish to apply the
signato velit applicare potentiam exteriorem ad exterior power to the work. But it is enough that it
opus : sed satis est, hic et nunc velle istum ef- here and now wish that effect, for the work follows
fectum, nam statim propter naturalem connex- at once on account of the natural connection of the
ionem potentiarum sequitur opus, ut maxime powers, as is especially clear in the use of intellect it-
patet in usu ipsius intellectus. Et ita intelligitur self. And thus St. Thomas is easily understood in that
facile D. Thomas, in illo art. 4, ad 1 et 3. art. 4, ad 1 and 3.
SECTIO III
WHAT ACT OF THE INTELLECT PRECEDES USE AND, AT THE SAME TIME, WHAT COMMAND IS AND
HOW IT IS DISTINGUISHED FROM USE (Quis actus intellectus antecedat usum, et simul quid sit imperium,
et quomodo distinguatur ab usu)
1. Datur in nobis imperium.—Prima sententia 1. A command is given in us.—The first view on what
quid sit imperium.—Auctores omnes conveniunt, command is.—All the authors agree that a certain in-
reperiri in nobis internum quoddam imperium, ternal command is found in us by which we command
quo nobis ipsis imperamus : quoniam imperare ourselves, since to command is to move something in-
est inferiorem movere, et ordinare opus. Homo ferior and to order work. A human being, however,
autem per potentias superiores se movet, et or- moves and orders himself to actions of the lower pow-
dinat ad operationes inferiorum potentiarum : ers through the superior powers. Hence, we distin-
unde in nobis distinguimus actus elicitos et im- guish in ourselves elicited and commanded acts, as will
peratos, ut infra dicetur : vide D. Thomam, be said below. See St. Thomas, Quodl. 9, a. 12. And so
quodlib. 9, a. 12. Itaque dari imperium certum it is certain that a command is given. What it is, how-
est : quid autem sit, non constat inter auctores. ever, is not clear among the authors. Many think that

-- 5 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 6
Multi censent esse ipsummet actum activum vol- it is the active act itself of the will. Scotus, in [Sent.]
untatis : ita Scotus, in 2, d. 36, d. 1, Medina, II, d. 36, d. 1, and Medina, in Codice de Pœn., tract. de
Codice de Pœnitentia, tract. de Oratione, c. 2. Oratione, c. 2, [think] this. The main foundation is
Fundamentum præcipuum est, quia finis imperii that the end of the command is to move and to order.
est movere, et ordinare : sed movere inferiores But to move the inferior powers is proper to the will,
potentias est proprium voluntatis, ut constat ex as is clear from what was said. Scotus says also that
dictis. Ordinare etiam, inquit Scotus, convenire to order one can agree with the will, either per se since
potest voluntati, vel per se, quia potentia im- the power is immaterial (and this suffices) or at least, as
materialis est : et hoc sufficit, vel saltem quasi it were, through participation from the intellect. It is
per participationem ab intellectu. Confirmatur confirmed: for command proximately regards execu-
: nam imperium proxime respicit executionem : tion. Therefore, it is that from which execution imme-
ergo est illud, ex quo immediate oritur executio diately arises. But execution immediately arises from
: oritur autem immediate ex <col. b> usu activo active use of the will, as is clear from what was said and
voluntatis, ut ex dictis patet, et in potentiis bruto- is manisfestly revealed in the powers of brute animals.
rum ostenditur manifeste. Nam motiones exteri- For exterior motions flow from appetite without any
ores ab appetitu manant sine aliquo alio imperio. other command.
2. Secunda sententia, variæque illius explicatio- 2. The second view and its various explications.—Its
nes.—Ejus fundamentum proprium.—Secunda sen- proper foundation.—The second view affirms that the
tentia affirmat actum imperii pertinere ad intel- act of command belongs to intellect. St. Thomas, in
lectum. Ita divus Thomas, 1, 2, q. 16, a. 1, et [ST ] IaIIæ.16.1 and 90.1, Cajetan, in these places, and
q. 90, a. 1, Cajetanus, his locis, Soto, 1, de Just., Soto, in De Just. I, q. 1, a. 1, [think] this. Never-
q. 1, a. 1. Tamen Thomistæ non conveniunt in theless, the Thomists do not agree in explaining this
explicando rem hanc. Nam quidam dicunt hoc matter. For certain ones say that this command pre-
imperium antecedere actum voluntatis. Alii elec- cedes an act of the will. Others say that it precedes
tionem : alii, solum esse post electionem, sed election. Others say that it exists only after election
ante usum. Alii etiam volunt, esse post usum but before use. Others also wish that it be after active
activum voluntatis, et immediate cadere in po- use of the will and immediately fall into the execut-
tentiam exequentem. In hoc tamen convenire vi- ing power. Yet they seem to agree in this since they
dentur, quia omnes putant, istud imperium esse all think that that command is an act distinct from a
actum distinctum a judicio intellectus, et consis- judgement of the intellect and that it consists in a cer-
tere in impulsu quodam, qui explicatur hac voce, tain impulse that is explicated by the phrase ‘do this’.
fac hoc. Et Aristoteles 3, Ethic., c. 10, manifeste And Aristotle in EN III, c. 10, manifestly distinguishes
distinguit imperium a judicio, et utrumque dicit command from judgement and says that each is an act
esse actum prudentiæ. Et ex Augustino 15, de of prudence. And [likewise] from Augustine, De Civ.
Civ., c. 7. Fundamentum proprium est, quia in- 15, c. 7. The proper foundation is because it is the role
tellectus est ordinare unum ad aliud, et hoc est of the intellect to order one thing to another and this
effectus imperii. is the effect of a command.
3. Duo præsupposita pro resolutione.—Suppono 3. Two presuppositions on behalf of a resolution.—I sup-
primo, nos hic loqui de imperio, quo quis sibi pose first that we say these things of the command by
ipsi imperat : nam de imperio, quo aliis im- which someone commands himself. For concerning
perat, agendum est in materia de legibus : licet the command by which he commands others should
hinc petenda sint fundamenta. Secundo sup- be dealt with in the material on laws, although the
pono, hominem dupliciter seipsum movere, et foundations may be sought from here. I suppose sec-
sibi imperare, primo, quasi in actu exercito, dum ondly that a human being moves himself and com-
se movet ad aliquid agendum : quamvis explicite mands himself in two ways. In the first way, in an
non exprimat illum actum, fac hoc. Alio modo exercised act, as it were, until he moves himself to do-
quasi in actu signato vel expresse signando illum ing something, although he does not explicitly express
actum, juxta illud : Spera in Domino : et illud : that act ‘do this’. In the other way, in a designated
Convertere animam meam in requiem tuam.1 act or in expressly designating that act like this [from

-- 6 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 7
Ps. 37:3]: ‘trust in the Lord’ and this [from Ps. 116:7]:
‘Turn my soul to your rest’.
1 Psalm 114:7, in the 1598 Vulgate, reads: ‘Convertere, anima mea, in requiem tuam’. But it looks like the Psalterium
Romanum might have also have the accusative ‘animam meam’ that Suárez uses.
4. Probabile in hac quæstione.—Secundum.—His 4. A probable [answer] to this question.—The second.—
positis hæc censeo in re probabiliora. Primum Of these proposed things I think these more proba-
ante electionem antecedere judicium practicum, ble in reality. First, that prior to election a practical
et non alium actum ab illo distinctum, qui possit judgement precedes and not another act distinct from
dici imperium. Hoc supra dixi et probavi. Secun- it which could be called command. I said and argued
dum post electionem illam, quæ abstrahit ab ex- for this above. Second, that after that election which
ecutione ante usum, natura saltem præcedere, et abstracts from execution prior to use, at least by na-
necessarium esse aliud judicium magis practicum ture there precedes another judgement that is neces-
in hoc distinctum a judicio, quod præcedit elec- sary and more practical and in this is distinct from that
tionem, quia immediatius attingit opus, et omnes judgement which precedes election, since it more im-
determinatas circumstantias neccssarias ad operis mediately achieves work and every determinate nec-
executionem. Et hinc est quod vehementius essary circumstance for execution of the work. And
etiam movet voluntatem non tam virtute sua, hence it is that it also more vigourously moves the will
quam virtute electionis jam factæ : ratio est, quia not so much by its own strength as by virtue of the
ante omnem actum voluntatis debet antecedere election already made. The reason is because before
<269> judicium intellectus illi consentaneum, every act of the will a judgement of the intellect appro-
a quo dirigatur et illuminetur : sed usus activas priate to it ought to go before by which it is directed
est actus voluntatis, quid aliquid addit illi elec- and illuminated. But active use is an act of will which
tioni jam factæ : ergo, etc. Et hoc judicium adds something to the election already made. There-
merito dici solet practice practicum, seu omnino fore, etc. And this judgement is usually, and rightly,
practicum; quia omnino, et prorsus ordinatur ad called practically practical or wholly practical, since
executionem operis, et magis inclinat ad vincen- it is wholly and entirely ordered to execution of the
dam difficultatem operis, quæ tempore executio- work and is more inclined to conquering the difficulty
nis major semper apparet, quam in consultatione of a work (which always appears greater at the time of
et electione abstracta. execution) than to consultation and abstract election.
5. Tertium.—Tertium, præter hæc duo judicia 5. Third.—Third, in addition to these two practical
practica reperiri in nobis actum illum, quem ex- judgements there is found in us that act which we ex-
perimur, cum nobiscum ita loquimur interius, perience when we thus internally say ‘do this’ to our-
fac hoc, qui actus non est judicii, sed interior quæ- selves. This act is not of the judgement but a certain
dam locutio, qua homo sibi ipsi explicat vel ra- internal locution by which a human being sets forth to
tionem, vel voluntatem operis exequendi. Nam himself either the reason or the will for executing the
sicut exterius alios alloquimur, vel enuntiando, work. For just as we externally address other people
vel imperando; ita etiam interius nobiscum : et by either declaring or commanding, so also we address
hæc interior locutio, sine dubio, est actus intel- ourselves internally. And this internal locution, with-
lectus, quia fit per conceptus interiores, et quia out doubt, is an act of the intellect, since it happens
est expressio proprii judicii, vel affectus. through interior concepts and since it is an expression
of a proper judgement or affect.
6. Quomodo fiat actus interior imperii?—Quod 6. How does an interior act of command happen?—
si quæras, quomodo fiat, arbitror, illum actum If you should ask how that happens, I observe that
non existere, neque fieri per conceptum, quem that act neither exists nor becomes through a concept
vocant ultimatum, sed per conceptus non ulti- which they call ultimate but through non-ultimate
mos ipsarum vocum non solum interius appre- concepts of those sounds not only by internally appre-
hendendo voces ipsas, sed in actu exercito, seu hending the sounds themselves but in an exercised act
loquendo per signa mentis, quæ vocibus corre- or by speaking through the mental signs which corre-

-- 7 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 8
spondent : quod patet in interiori locutione per spond to the sounds. This is clear in internal locution
modum optantis. Nam si consideremus, quod through the way of desiring (optantis). For if consider
sit ultimum significatum hujus internæ locutio- what the ultimate significate of this internal locution
nis, utinam hoc fieret : illud certe non est, nisi ‘would that this would happen’ is, it certainly is not
desiderium voluntatis : et tamen locutio illa in in- anything other than a desire of the will. And yet that
tellectu est, quæ fieri non potest, nisi dicto modo locution is in the intellect, which cannot happen ex-
: ergo similiter in proposito. cept in the stated way. Therefore, likewise in the pro-
posed case.
7. An istud imperium ante vel post voluntatem 7. Whether that command exists before or after will-
existat.—Non est necessarium, sed utile.—Sed quæ- ing.—It is not necessary, but useful.—But you will ask
res, an iste actus antecedat, vel sequatur volun- whether that act precedes or follows willing. It
tatem? Respondetur ex Augustino 8, lib. Con- is responded according to Augustine, who says in
fess., c. 9, dicente : Imperat sibi animus ut velit, Conf. VIII, c. 9: ‘The rational soul commands itself
qui non imperaret, nisi vellet. Hoc ergo im- to will, which could not command except it will’.1
perium, si efficax est et verum, absolutam volun- This command, therefore, if it is efficacious and true,
tatem supponit. Nam si fiat sine ulla voluntate, supposes a finished willing. For if it were to happen
est fictum et tantum verba : si vero voluntas, quæ without any willing, it is imagined and mere words.
antecedit, sit inefficax, ipsum etiam inefficax erit But if the willing which precedes is inefficacious, then
: et ratio est, quia tota efficacia movendi est a vol- it itself will also be inefficacious. And the reason is
untate. Dices, Ad quid ergo est iste actus? Re- because the entire efficaciousness of moving is from
spondetur : non est quidem per se necessarius, ut the will.
voluntas, aut exterior potentia moveatur : tum You will say: to what, therefore, is this act? It is re-
quia voluntas antecedit, tum etiam, quia potest sponded: it is at least not per se necessary that the will
esse motio, ut experimur : tum etiam, quia nulla or external power be moved. First, because the will-
potentia percipit illud imperium, <col. b> nisi ing precedes. Next, also, because there can be motion,
ipse intellectus : est tamen utilis iste actus, ut vol- as we experience. Next, also, because no power per-
untas ipsa, et totus homo magis moveatur, vel ut ceives that command if not the intellect itself. Never-
citius aggrediatur executionem, vel constantius theless, that act is useful for moving the will itself and
in ea perseveret, quia dum homo sibi ita imperat the entire human being, either undertaking the execu-
quasi supra seipsum reflectitur, et fit sibi superior tion more quickly or persevering in it with more con-
: et denique quia ipsa locutio nescio quomodo stancy, since then the human being commands himself
vim habet movendi et incitandi animum. in such a way as if he is reflected over himself and is
made his own superior. And, finally, because the locu-
tion itself somehow has the power to move and incite
the soul.
1 Latin text from James J. O’Donnell’s edition: ‘imperat animus ut velit animus, nec alter est nec facit tamen. unde hoc
monstrum? et quare istuc, inquam, ut velit qui non imperaret nisi vellet, et non facit quod imperat?’
8. Quartum probabile in hac quæstione.—Probatur 8. The fourth probable [answer] to this question.—It is
primo.—Quartum, præter dicta judicia practica, proved, first.—Fourth, in addition to the mentioned
et istam locutionem, nullum esse actum intellec- practical judgements and that locution, it is clear that
tus, qui dici possit imperium, patet : quia nul- there is no act of the intellect which can be called
lus alius actus est necessarius neque ad moven- judgement, since no other act is necessary either for
dam voluntatem, neque ad potentiam exequen- moving the will or for executing a power. The first
dam. Primum patet ex dictis, quia ostensum est, is clear from what was said, since it was shown that
voluntatem vel sufficienter moveri dictis judiciis the will either is sufficiently moved by the mentioned
practicis : vel etiam necessario, si aliquis actus practical judgements or also necessarily if some act in
in voluntate præcedat, cum quo alius actus nec- the will precedes when by that another act has a neces-
essariam connexionem habeat : quam connex- sary connection, which connection the intellect puts
ionem intellectus per judicium proponit. Secun- forward through a judgement. The second is also clear

-- 8 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 9
dum patet etiam, et ostenditur argumentis pri- and was shown by the arguments for the first view.
oris sententiæ. Et constat ex Aristotele 3, de An- And it also agrees with Aristotle in the last chapter of
ima, cap. ult., et ex D. Thoma, illa q. 17, a. 8, ad DA III and St. Thomas in [ST IaIIæ].17.8 ad 1:1 exe-
1, potentias exequentes non applicari immediate, cuting powers are not applied immediately except by
nisi ab appetitu. appetite.
1 Erroneous citation?
9. Probatur secundo.—Confirmatur.—Præterea 9. It is proved, second.—It is confirmed.—Besides, an-
non potest intelligi talis alius actus. Nam om- other such act cannot be understood. For every act of
nis actus intellectus, vel est apprehensio, vel judi- the intellect is either an apprehension, judgement, or
cium, vel locutio : et ratio est, quia intellectus es- locution. And the reason is because the intellect essen-
sentialiter, et adæquate, est potentia cognoscitiva tially, and adequately, is a cognoscitive power. More-
: potentia autem cognoscitiva duo tantum potest over, a cognoscitive power can effect only two things,
efficere, nempe cognoscere quod non fit, nisi ap- namely to cognize (which cannot happen except by
prehendendo et judicando, et exprimere quod apprehending and judging) and to express what it cog-
cognovit, nempe loquendo : ergo, etc. Con- nized, namely, by speaking. Therefore, etc.
firmatur, quia quidquid voluntas efficit, efficit It is confirmed since whatever will effects, it effects
per modum potentiæ appetentis : unde si movet, in the way of a desiring power. Hence, if it moves
et applicat exteriores potentias ad opus, id non and applies external powers to work, it does not do
facit, neque potest, nisi appetendo et volendo that nor can it do that except by desiring and willing.
: ergo similiter intellectus, quidquid operatur, Therefore, likewise, the intellect, whatever it does, it
efficit per modum potentiæ cognoscitivæ : vel effects in the way of a cognoscitive power. Or, cer-
certe si non potest illi accommodari, tanquam tainly, if it cannot be applied to that as to one cogniz-
cognoscenti, nullo modo potest fieri, etiam ad ing, it can happen in no way. It also seems to belong
quæstionem de nomine pertinere videtur, cui is- to the question of the name to which of those acts the
torum actuum accommodari debeat nomen, et name and nature of command, which is to move with
ratio imperii, quæ est movere cum ordinatione. ordination, ought to be applied.
10. Cui actui competat nomen imperii prima as- 10. The first assertion concerning to which act the name
sertio.—Et dico breviter primo : usum voluntatis of command is applicable.—And I say briefly, first: use
sæpe dici imperium, id constat ex D. Thoma 1, of the will is often called command, which is based
2, q. 71, a. 6, ad 2 et 2, 2, q. 4, art. 2, ad 2, quibus on St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.71.6 ad 2 and IIaIIæ.4.2
locis voluntatis dicit esse imperare cæteris poten- ad 2, in which places he says that it belongs to will
tiis, etiam intellectui. Et eodem modo, ut dictum to command the other powers, including the intellect.
infra, unus actus <270> voluntatis imperatur ab And in the same way, as was said below, one act of the
alio actu ejusdem, ut actus misericordiæ ab actu will is commanded by another act of the will, as an act
charitatis : et ratio hujus locutionis sumi potest of mercy by an act of charity. And the reason for this
ex dictis in prima sententia : et quia imperare locution can be taken from what was said in the first
est habentis dominium : voluntas vero est, quæ view. And since to command is to have dominion. But
quasi habet dominium omnium actionum huma- it is the will which, as it were, has dominion over all
narum. human actions.
11. Secunda assertio.—Dico tamen secundo : ac- 11. The second assertion.—Yet I say, secondly: An act
tus intellectus dicitur imperium, et proprie illi of intellect is called command and the concept for this
convenit ratio hujus vocis. Hoc vult D. Thomas, word properly agrees with it. St. Thomas wishes this
in d. q. 17, a. 1, et patet, nam imprimis illa ac- in [ST IaIIæ].17.1. And it is clear for especially that
tio per modum imperantis manifeste continet ra- action in the way of commanding manifestly contains
tionem imperii, quia movet et ordinat. Patet the nature of a command, since it moves and orders. It
etiam, quia simili modo imperamus aliis : et hoc is also clear since we command others in a similar way.
modo videtur loqui Augustinus supra : tamen And it seems that Augustine above [in n. 2] speaks
Aristoteles non loquitur de hoc imperio vero, sed in this way. Still, Aristotle is not speaking about

-- 9 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 10
de illo, quod simpliciter necessarium est ad actus this command, however, but concerning that which is
prudentiæ, et exercitium virtutis. Et ideo Aris- strictly speaking necessary for an act of prudence and
toteles tam judicium illud practicum, quod ante- exercise of virtue. And for that reason Aristotle rather
cedit electionem, quam quod antecedit usum, vo- calls that practical judgement which precedes election
cat imperium : et ratio est, quia imperare non est command than that which precedes use. And the rea-
quomodocumque movere, sed movere quasi im- son is because to command is not in any way to move
ponendo legem : intellectus autem est qui legem but to move, as it were, by imposing a law. The in-
ponit voluntati, quoniam judicat de agendis. tellect, moreover, is what places a law on the will, be-
cause it judges concerning what is to be done.
12. Notatio prima.—Notatio secunda.—Sed nota 12. The first note.—The second note.—But note first that
primo, multos in hoc fuisse deceptos, quia putant many have been deceived in this, since they think that
de ratione imperii intellectus esse, ut necessi- it is of the nature of the command of intellect to in-
tatem inferat voluntati; et propterea non attribu- flict necessity to the will and therefore they do not at-
unt hanc rationem judicio practico, sed alteri tribute this nature to a practical judgement but to an-
actui, quod falsum esse constat ex D. Thoma, other act. This is false according to St. Thomas art. 3
art. 3 et 4, ad 2, et contra Aristotelem dicen- and 4, ad 2, and is in opposition to Aristotle who says
tem rationem imperare voluntati regendo et ju- that reason commands the will by ruling and judging.
dicando : et ratione constat; quia non est de ra- And it is clear by reason, since it is not of the nature of
tione legis, ut necessitatem inferat; ergo nec de law to impose necessity. Therefore, neither is it of the
ratione particularis imperii, quod quis sibi im- nature of a particular command which someone im-
ponit, quod est quasi lex particularis. Et confir- poses on himself, which is, as it were, a particular law.
matur : nam cum aliis imperamus : non infer- And it is confirmed: for when we command others,
imus illis necessitatem. Nota secundo apud Aris- we do not impose necessity on them.
totelem cum distinguit imperium prudentiæ a ju- Note, secondly, that with Aristotle when he dis-
dicio, nomine imperii intelligere illud judicium tinguishes the command of prudence from a judge-
practice practicum, quod proprie antecedit usum ment, by the name ‘command’ is understood that
tanquam ejus regula : neque vero intelligit hunc practically practical judgement which properly pre-
actum non esse per modum judicii : nam falsum cedes use just as its rule. But neither does he under-
id esse constat ex dictis. Constat etiam ex verbis stand this act not to be in the mode of a judgement.
ejus : nam dicit, illum actum esse conclusionem For that this is false is clear from what has been said.
syllogismi practici : conclusio autem vim judicii It is also clear from his words. For he says that that
habet, nam manifestat connexionem inter elec- act is the conclusion of a practical syllogism. But the
tionem factam et usum, seu exercitium actionis : conclusion has the force of a judgement, for it mani-
et hinc habet vim ad determinandam voluntatem fests the connection between an election that has been
: nam revera si talis actus nihil denuo ostenderit made and the use or exercise of action. And hence it
voluntati, esset inutilis : distinguit ergo hunc ac- has the force for determining the will. For in reality if
tum a judicio, quia tota consultatio, et difficultas such an act does not show something anew to the will,
ferendi judicium <col. b> pendet ex consulta- it would be useless. Therefore, he distinguishes this
tione, et judicio, quod post illam sequitur : facta act from judgement, since the whole deliberation and
autem consultatione, et judicio, jam difficultas difficulty in producing the judgement depends on the
non est, in cognitione, sed in exequendo; et per deliberation and judgement that follow after that. But
hæc constat, quid veritatis habeant sententiæ al- once the deliberation and judgement has been done,
latæ. the difficulty no longer is in cognition but in execut-
ing. And through these things it is clear what truth
the reported views have.
13. An usus præcedat imperium.—Uno modo im- 13. Whether use precedes command.—In one way com-
perium præcedit.—Et ex his facile solvitur quæs- mand precedes.—And the question which St. Thomas
tio, quam D. Thomas, art. 3 illius quæstionis 17, discusses in [ST IaIIæ].17.3 (namely, whether use pre-
tractat : nempe an usus præcedat imperium? In cedes command) is easily solved with these. Regard-

-- 10 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 11
qua breviter nota, voluntatem uti intellectu, et ing this, note briefly: will uses the intellect and other
aliis potentiis, quia omnis actus liber ut sic, est powers, since every act that is free as such is by will.
a voluntate : loqui ergo possumus de usu vol- Therefore, we can speak of the use of will and the com-
untatis et imperio intellectus, prout directe ten- mand of intellect, as they directly tend to the direction
dunt ad directionem, seu actionem potentiæ exe- or action of the executing power. In this way it is clear
quentis : hoc modo constat, imperium eo modo, that command in the way in which it is in intellect pre-
quo est in intellectu, antecedere usum ratione ju- cedes use by reason of the practical judgement. This is
dicii practici. Quod satis ex dictis patet : ratione clear enough from what was said. But by reason of
vero illius locutionis non necessario antecedere, that locution it does not necessary precede but, as it
sed quasi concomitanter. Notat vero D. Thomas were, concomitantly. But St. Thomas notes that that
illud imperium, seu judicium intellectus, etiamsi command or judgement of the intellect, even if it is
omnino practicum sit, sæpe natura tantum, non- entirely practical, often only by nature but sometimes
nunquam vero etiam tempore antecedere usum, also in time precedes use, since either the command is
quia vel imperium non est efficax, vel voluntas not efficacious or the will does not wish to obey but
non vult obedire, sed mutare, vel differre elec- to change or delay election. Or perhaps, since the ex-
tionem : vel forte, quia potentia exequens est ecuting power is is some way obstructed. Moreover,
aliquo modo impedita. De ipso autem usu volun- concerning this use of the will, St. Thomas says that it
tatis dicit D. Thomas, nullo modo antecedere ac- in no way precedes the action of the executive power,
tionem potentiæ executivæ : quia omnino movet since it wholly moves that and since in the genus of
illam, et quia in genere moris non solum est prin- morality it not only is its effective principle, but, as it
cipium effectivum ejus, sed quasi forma, et ideo were, form, and for that reason they are thought to be
censentur esse simili omnino. wholly similar.
14. Alio modo subsequitur.—Si autem loquamur 14. It is pursued in another way.—But if we speak in
posteriori modo, et consideremus ipsum im- the latter way and consider that command insofar as
perium, quatenus actus liber est, necessario di- the act is free, it must necessarily be said to proceed
cendum est, a voluntate procedere : atque adeo from the will. And to that extent it can be to some use
esse potest ad aliquem usum voluntatis. Sed of the will. But it is necessary to note here that that
oportet hic advertere, istum usum non neces- use is not necessary through a formal and express act
sario per actum formalem, et expressum, quo by which the will wished to command the intellect,
voluntas velit intellectui imperare, sed frequenter but frequently it happens only through a virtual use.
fieri solum virtuali usu : nam posita intentione For by an efficacious intention of the end having been
efficaci finis, sæpe ex vi illius applicatur intellec- posited, the intellect is often applied by the strength of
tus ad inquirenda media. Et similiter ex vi elec- that to searching for means. And likewise it is applied
tionis applicatur ad cogitandum de executione by the strength of election to thinking about the ex-
ipsa, licet etiam interdum præcedere possit ille ecution itself, although sometimes that formal act of
formalis actus voluntatis applicantis intellectum the will applying the intellect can also precede. This
: quod maxime contingit in illo imperio, quod fit happens especially in that command which happens
per interiorem locutionem : nam cum illud non through an interior locution. For when the former
sit ex natura rei simpliciter necessarium : vix un- is not strictly speaking necessary by the nature of the
quam sequitur ex virtute alterius actus, sed ex thing, it hardly ever follows by the force of another
formali voluntate sibi imperandi, sicut contingit act, but by the formal will commanding itself, just as
in imperio; quo aliis imperamus. Unde fit, ut happens in a command by which we command oth-
ante hanc voluntatem debeat <271> præcedere, ers. Hence, it happens that before this will there must
et cognitio, et judicium, et consequenter quo- precede both cognition and judgement, and, conse-
dammodo usus. Quapropter ne in infinitum pro- quently, use in a certain way. In order not to proceed
cedatur, in aliquo virtuali usu intellectus sisten- into infinity it must be stopped in some virtual use of
dum est. the intellect.

-- 11 of 12 --

Suárez De Voluntario et Involuntario disp. 9 12
DE LEGIBUS, LIB. 7, CAP. 1, N. 2
<136, col. a>
2. Secunda opinio.—Usus quid.—Superiores vero 2. The second opinion.—What use is.—But the above
difficultates magna ex parte oriuntur ex æquivo- difficulties arise for the most part from equivocation
catione terminorum, ideoque significationes eo- of terms and therefore their significations must first
rum explicandæ prius sunt, ut res ipsa intelligi be explained so that the very matter can be under-
possit. Tres ergo termini imprimis sunt notandi, stood. Therefore three terms especially need to be
scilicet, usus, mos, consuetudo : nam in hoc noted: namely, use (usus), mos, and consuetudo. For
conveniunt, quod solum in actibus liberis pro- they agree in this that they are properly said only of
prie dicuntur, et quamdam inter se affinitatem free acts and they have between them a certain affin-
et connexionem habent, et nihilominus aliquod ity and connection. Nevertheless, some distinction is
discrimen inter illos invenitur. Usus ergo, in the- found between them.
ologica proprietate, significat actum quo volun- Use, therefore, in its characteristic theological fea-
tas libere exequitur quod eligit, juxta doctrinam ture, signifies an act by which the will freely executes
D. Thomæ 1. 2, quæst. 16, per totam; et Augus- what it elects, following the doctrine of St. Thomas in
tini, lib. 10 de Trinitate, c. 11, et lib. 83 Quæst., [ST ] IaIIæ.16 (the entire question) and of Augustine
quæst. 30, ubi hac ratione dixit non posse uti nisi in De Trin. X, c. 11 and Quæst. LXXIII, q. 30, where
animal quod rationis est particeps, quia solum for this reason he said that nothing can use except an
illud libere se vel alia applicat ad operationem, animal that partakes in reason. For only it can freely
quam applicationem usus significat. Unde fit ut apply itself or something else to action, which applica-
usus, in philosophico rigore, dicatur de quolibet tion use signifies.
actu utendi per se spectato, quia quilibet est lib- Hence, it happens that use, with philosophical
era applicatio facultatis ad medii executionem, si- rigour, is said of any act of using considered per se,
cut quicumque actus gaudii de fine adepto dicitur since it is any free application of a faculty to the ex-
fruitio. Nihilominus tamen, communi et usitato ecution of means, just as any act of joy concerning an
modo loquendi, usus significat similium actuum attained end is called enjoyment. Still, nevertheless, by
frequentiam; quomodo dicitur in l. 1, tit. 2, p. 1, a common and familiar way of speaking, use signifies
usum nasci ex his rebus quas aliquis facit longo et a frequency of similar acts, just as it is said in l. 1, tit. 2,
continuo tempore, ut notavit ibi Greg. Lop. Ubi p. 1 that use arises from these things which someone
hac ratione dicit usum esse quid facti, scilicet, does for a long and unbroken time, as Gregory noted
frequentiam ipsam libere operandi circa rem ali- here in Lop. For this reason he says that use is what
quam, eodem, seu uniformi modo. In lege autem has been done, namely, the very frequency of freely
illa dicitur, usum esse id quod relinquitur, seu acting concerning some thing in the same or uniform
nascitur ex illa frequentia actuum, quod statim way. But in law this is said: use is that which is left be-
explicabitur. hind or arises from that frequency of acts (which will
be explained at once).

-- 12 of 12 --
