Last revision: December 20, 2010	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 3, SECT. 11
© Sydney Penner 2010
<25, col. b>2
De ultimo fine hominis in communi, et de modo operandi propter On the ultimate end of humans in general, and the manner of acting for
illum. the sake of it.
Postquam de fine generaliter dictum est, oportet ut de illo in After what has been said of the end in general, it is necessary that we
particulari aliqua dicamus, quoniam hic finis et præcipuam ra- say something about it in particular, because this end not only has the
5 tionem finis habet, et primum principium est omnium oper- 5R special character of an end but also is the first principle of everything
abilium, et ejus ratio in beatitudine po- <26> tissimum reper- that can be done and its character is to be found above all in happiness,
itur, ad quam totus hic sermo de fine refertur: diximus autem to which this whole discussion about the end is directed. Moreover, we
supra, disput. 1, sect. 6, num. 2, alium esse finem ultimum sim- said above (disp. 1, sect. 6, n. 2) that it is one thing for an end to be the
pliciter et positive, alium vero ultimum secundum quid et neg- unqualifiedly and positively ultimate end, and another thing, however,
10 ative: et quamvis præcipua hujus disputationis intentio sit de 10R [for it to be] a qualifiedly and negatively ultimate end. And although
priori, tamen ob majorem claritatem et doctrinæ complemen- the main purpose of this disputation is concerning the former, never-
tum, dicemus etiam de posteriori, et primo videbimus quam theless, for the sake of greater clarity and completeness of doctrine, we
sit necessarius hic finis ad operationes humanas: deinde, an sit will also talk about the latter. And first we will see how this end is nec-
unus tantum vel possit esse multiplex. essary for human activity; then, whether there is only one or whether
15R it is possible for there to be more than one.
15 SECTIO I. SECTION I.
Utrum necessarium sit constituere aliquem finem ultimum homi- Whether it is necessary to set up some ultimate end for humans and their
nis, et actionum ejus. actions.
Dupliciter intelligi potest hominem ordinari ad finem ulti- A human being ordered to an ultimate end can be understood in two
mum: uno modo, ex intentione auctoris naturæ, ordinatione 20R ways: in one way, by the intention of the author of nature, an order-
20 quasi extrinseca, et passiva: alio modo ex libera voluntate et ing that is, as it were, extrinsic and passive; in the second way, by free
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the
1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V =
Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
17 actionum ] actionem V.
20 extrinseca ] intrinseca V.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 1 2
actione sua, atque adeo ordinatione quasi intrinseca et activa, will and its action (for without doubt a human being first determines
quia nimirum homo per actum suæ voluntatis aliquem finem through an act of his will some ultimate end for himself towards which
ultimum sibi præstituit, in quem dirigat actiones suas, qui he directs his actions), and, for that reason, an ordering that is, as it
potest intelligi vel finis ultimus simpliciter, vel secundum quid. 25R were, intrinsic and active. This end can be understood either as an un-
qualifiedly ultimate end or as an qualifiedly ultimate end.3
25	I. Assertio;
homini competit
aliquis finis
ultimus
simpliciter.
Probatur autorit.
1. Dico ergo primo dari aliquem finem ultimum sim- 1. In the first place, then, I say that some unqualifiedly ultimate 1st assertion:
some
unqualifiedly
ultimate end is
applicable to a
human. It is
proven from
authority.
pliciter, ad quem, et propter quem homo institutus est ab auc- end is given to which (ad quem) and for the sake of which (propter
tore naturæ. Hæc conclusio est simpliciter de fide, ut etiam quem) humans were made by the author of nature. This conclusion is,
ostendi in disputat. 24, Metaphysicæ, sect. 1, quia constat 30R strictly speaking, of the faith, as I showed in Disputationes metaphysicæ
Deum esse finem ultimum creaturarum omnium, et juxta il- 24, sect. 1, because [1] it is evident that God is the ultimate end of all
30 lud Apocalypsis 1, Ego sum α et ω; quod latius tractatur, 1 creatures and [2] on account of Rev. 1[:8] (‘I am the Alpha and the
part., quæst. 5, art. 4, et specialiter constat esse finem ulti- Omega’), which is discussed more extensively in [ST ] Ia.5.4 and [3] it
mum hominis, qui proprie et peculiari modo potest Deum is evident, in particular, that [God] is the ultimate end of humans who
attingere, ut latius infra probabimus, disputat. 5, agentes de 35R are able to reach God strictly speaking and in a special way,4 as we will
objecto beatitudinis. Et hoc etiam est lumine naturæ notum, show more extensively below in disp. 5 when dealing with the object
35 quod homo habeat aliquem finem ultimum sibi communica- of happiness. That a human being has some ultimate end communica-
bilem, et ita posuerunt omnes philosophi, qui de beatitudine ble to himself is also known by the light of nature. All philosophers
disputarunt: ut videre est apud Aristotelem 2, Ethicor., a prin- who have disputed concerning happiness have supposed this, as is seen
cip., et Ciceronem, 1. de Finibus, et alia congerit Augustinus, 40R in Aristotle, in the beginning of EN II, and in Cicero, De finibus I, and
Item ratione. lib. 9, de Civitate, fere per totum. Et ratio est facilis, quia Augustine collects others throughout Book IX of De civ. Dei.
40 homo nec frustra, nec casu est in mundo: est ergo effectus And the reason is easy: because humans are in the world neither And from reason.
propter aliquem finem: et cum in finibus non procedatur in vainly nor by chance. They are, therefore, an effect for the sake of
infinitum, necesse est ut sit factus propter aliquem finem ul- some end. And since one does not proceed into infinity with ends, it
timum. Deinde ipsa constitutio naturæ humanæ hoc intrin- 45R is necessary that it have come about for the sake of some ultimate end.
sece postulat, tum quia alias non haberet homo natura sua cer- Therefore, this establishment of human nature intrinsically demands
45 tum termi- <col. b> num in quem secundum rectam rationem these things. Both [i] because otherwise a human by his own nature
operationes suas dirigeret: unde fieret, ut neque etiam posset would not have a fixed terminus in the following of which right reason
recte vitam suam instituere: tum denique, quia sicut in inten- could direct his actions, with the result that he would not be able to set
tionibus, et electionibus non potest in infinitum procedi, sed 50R up his own life rightly, and, finally, [ii] because just as in intentions and
deveniendum necessario est ad aliquem ultimum finem; ita in choices one is not able to proceed into infinity, but some ultimate end
50 singulis rebus necesse est, ut tota natura inclinetur ad aliquid must necessarily be arrived at, so in each individual thing it is necessary
ultimum, sicut contingit in arte: licet contingat in una arte, that the whole nature be inclined to something final, just as in the case
multas esse actiones, necesse tamen est ut omnes tendant in in art. Although it is the case that in one art there are many actions,
unum aliquem finem: nam si ars est una, et multas actiones 55R nevertheless it is necessary that they all aim at some one end. For if
sub se comprehendit, necesse est aliquem ordinem inter eas ser- art is one and many actions are included under it, it is necessary that
3Neither the 1628 nor the Vivés editions number the first paragraph.
4The idea here is that God is the ultimate end of humans, in a way that is distinctive of or peculiar to humans. Non-rational animals do not have God as their ultimate end in
the same way.

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 1 3
55 vari, atque adeo omnes ferri ad aliquid, quod est perfectum, et some order be kept among them and, indeed, that all be brought into
consummatum in tali arte: sic ergo cum natura hominis una relation with something which is perfect and consummate in such an
sic, et plures operationes complectatur, perfecta ejus institutio art. Likewise, therefore, since the nature of humans is one in this sort
intrinsece postulat ordinem, atque adeo imperfectiora propter 60R of way and embraces many actions, a perfect arrangement of it intrinsi-
perfectiora, et hæc propter id, quod in homine est perfectissi- cally posits order. And, indeed, the more imperfect things on account
60 mum, sicque illud habebit rationem ultimi finis. of the more perfect and these on account of that which is most perfect
in humans and so it will have the character of an ultimate end.
Obiectio contra
nunc dicta
soluitur.
2. Dices, hoc discursu ad summum probari, vivere secun- 2. You will say that this reasoning proves at most that the ultimate An objection
against what was
just said is
resolved.
dum rectam rationem esse finem ultimum hominis, non tamen 65R end of humans is to live following according to right reason. Never-
quod in eo gradu et ordine detur aliquis finis ultimus, quia in theless, some ultimate end is not yet given in the same grade and or-
eo gradu sunt multæ virtutes, omnes propter se amabiles, quæ der, because there are many virtues in the same grade—all worthy to be
65 possunt intendi per modum finis ultimi. Respondeo, etiamsi loved for their own sake—which can be intended through the mode of
stemus totum id, quod argumentum postulat, id non esse con- an ultimate end. I respond: even if we should grant everything which
tra positam assertionem, quia nunc non agimus de fine ultimo, 70R the argument posits, it is not contrary to the posited assertion, because
in quo consistat, an in una re, vel operatione, sed solum an sit, we are not now asking what the ultimate end consists in or whether
et hoc concludit ratio facta. De alio vero puncto acturi sumus, it is one thing or action, but only with whether there is one. And
70 disput. 6, sect. 3, agentes de beatitudine. Addit præterea Du- the reasoning given concludes this [matter]. But we will deal with the
randus, in 2, distint. 38, quæst. 4, num. 8, rationem factam other point in disp. 6, sect. 3, when dealing with happiness. In addition,
posse proportionaliter applicari, nam in ipso vivere secundum 75R Durandus adds in 2, dist. 38, q. 4, n. 8, that the given reasoning can be
rationem est multitudo actionum et operationum, inter quas applied analogously, for to live following reason involves in itself a mul-
potest etiam servari ordo, ut imperfectiora ad perfectiora or- titude of actions and activities among which order can still be preserved
75 dinentur: ac denique tota rationalis vita ad id, quod summum so that the more imperfect are ordered to the more perfect and, finally,
et perfectissimum est; quod latius tractaturi sumus agentes de the entire rational life to that which is the highest and most perfect. We
beatitudine. 80R will discuss this more extensively when dealing with happiness.
Consectarium ex
assertione.
3. Atque ex hac conclusione sequitur omnes homines 3. And from this conclusion it follows that all human beings agree Consequences of
the assertion.	convenire in hoc ultimo fine, vel secundum naturæ propen- in this ultimate end. They either follow the inclination of nature (be-
80 sionem, quia est hominum natura; vel secundum Dei ordina- cause it is the nature of human beings) or they follow the ordination of
tionem, quia tota humana species ad eumdem finem adeo dis- God (because the entire human species has for that reason been marked
tincta est: at vero secundum appetitum elicitivum non omnes 85R off to the same end). But, to be sure, not all human beings intend the
homines eumdem finem intendunt, quia hoc pendet ex eorum same end in following elicitive appetite, because this depends on their
libertate et cognitione, vel ignorantia. Addit vero D. Thomas, freedom and cognition or ignorance. In addition, St. Thomas says in
85 quæst. 1, art. 7, omnes,<27> qui habent affectum bene dis- [ST IaIIae.]1.7 that everyone who has a well-disposed affection agrees
positum, convenire in hoc ultimo fine etiam secundum in- in this ultimate end even when following elicited intention. What must
tentionem elicitam. Quod intelligendum est juxta modum et 90R be understood equally is the mode and quality of the good disposition.
qualitatem bonæ dispositionis: nam si illa dispositio sit super- For if that disposition is supernatural and procedes from supernatural
naturalis, et ex cognitione, ac virtute supernaturali procedat, cognition and virtue, all who have participated in it agree in the same
90 omnes, qui illam participaverint, convenient in eodem fine su- supernatural end. If, however, the disposition is only natural or moral,
pernaturali: si autem dispositio fuerit tantum naturalis, seu they agree in the ultimate natural end either formally having been in-

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 1 4
moralis, convenient in fine ultimo naturali vel formaliter in- 95R tended or at least interpretatively,5 because everyone intends to live in
tento, vel saltem interpretative, quia omnes intendunt secun- accordance with right reason. As a result, although they differ with
dum rectam rationem vivere. Unde licet in finibus proximis respect to proximate ends (as Durandus wrote in the cited place) be-
95 differe possint, ut Durandus notavit, loco citato, quia unus cause one can intend one virtue and another another, they still all aim
potest unam virtutem intendere, alius aliam: tamen omnes ten- at the same ultimate end because that end is indeed the more perfect
dent in eumdem ultimum finem, quia ille finis adeo perfectus 100R (as Bonaventure says in [Sent.] II, dist. 38, art. 1, q. 4), so that it draws
est, ut inquit Bonaventura, in 2, distinct. 38, art. 1, quæst. 4, ut to itself everyone acting well and it alone can satisfy the well-disposed
omnes bene operantes ad se trahat, et solus ipse possit affectum affection.
100 bene dispositum satiare.
2. Assertio,
prima hominis
actio non
necessario est
circa ultimum
finem simpliciter.
Probatur.
4. Dicendum est secundo, non est necesse ut omnis homo, 4. Second, it must be said that it is not necessary that every human 2nd assertion: the
first action of a
human is not
necessarily
concerning the
unqualifiedly
ultimate end.
quando primo operatur, intendat propria et formali intentione being, when he first acts, intend with a proper and formal elicited inten-
elicita aliquem finem ultimum simpliciter, in quem se et om- 105R tion some unqualifiedly ultimate end to which he directs himself and all
nia sua referat. Probatur, quia talis intentio neque est absolute his [actions]. This is proven: because such an intention is neither ab-
105 necessaria per se, neque ad alias operationes: ergo nullo modo solutely necessary through itself nor for other actions. Therefore, it is
est necessaria. Prior pars antecedentis probatur, quia omnis in- necessary in no way. The first part of the antecedent is proven: because
tentio voluntatis in via est libera saltem quoad exercitium, vel every intention of the will in this life is free at least with respect to exer-
etiam quoad specificationem, si sit de re aliqua determinata. 110R cise, or even with respect to specification, if it is determinate according
Posterior vero pars probatur, quia ad operationes morales suf- to some thing. Now the latter part is proven: because for moral actions
110 ficit intentio particularis finis, qui proprie intendatur, et sit ul- an intention of a particular end suffices which is properly intended and
Confirmatur. timus tantum secundum quid, et negative. Unde explicatur, et is ultimate only qualifiedly and negatively. Hence, the conclusion is It is confirmed.
confirmatur conclusio, nam quando homo pervenit, verbi gra- confirmed and explained: for when a human being arrives at, for exam-
tia, ad usum rationis, potest inchoare operationes suas morales 115R ple, the use of reason,6 he can begin his moral actions with a particular
a particularibus objectis, verbi gratia, intendendo honorem, object, intending, for example, honour, good health, or something sim-
115 salutem, vel quid simile prius quam tractet de fine ultimo sim- ilar, which he deals with before dealing with the unqualifiedly ultimate
pliciter, et propter illos fines potest libere eligere et operari: end. And he can freely choose and act for the sake of those ends. Nor
nec dici potest quod saltem interpretative intendat finem il- can it be said that he at least interpretatively intends that particular end
lum particularem tanquam finem ultimum simpliciter et pos- 120R as an unqualifiedly and positively ultimate end, for this is not necessary.
itive hoc enim necessarium non est, alias in tali affectu pecca- Otherwise he would sin mortally with such an affection. This is plainly
120 ret mortaliter, quod est plane falsum, quia fieri potest ut tale false, because it can happen that such an object is neither contrary to
objectum nec contra præceptum sit, nec contra charitatem, et precept nor contrary to charity, and consequently that it is loved nei-
consequenter ut nec formaliter, nec virtute, seu interpretative ther formally nor virtually nor interpretatively as the highest good.
ametur ut summum bonum. <col. b>
3. Assertio, in
actionibus
humanis semper
intenditur finis
aliquo modo
ultimus.
5. Dicendum tertio, necessarium esse hominem exer- 125R 5. Thirdly, it must be said that it is necessary that a human per- 3rd assertion: an
ultimate end is
always intended
in some manner
in human
actions.
125 centem actiones humanas intendere aliquem finem ultimum forming human actions intend some ultimate end at least negatively
saltem negative et secundum quid. Juxta quam conclusionem and qualifiedly. Saint Thomas can be understood as agreeing with this
5See 2.4.5.
6That is, becomes a young adult.

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 1 5
potest intelligi D. Thomas, 1, 2, quæst. 1, art. 4, et eam con- conclusion in [ST ] IaIIae.1.4, [co.], and his account establishes it [the
vincit ratio ejus, quia non est progressus in infinitum in finibus, conclusion], because there is not a progression into infinity with ends,
sicut neque in aliis causis per se ordinatis, de qua præter Aris- 130R just as there also is not in other causes ordered per se. Concerning these,
130 totelem 2, Metaphysicæ, cap. 2, legi potest idem D. Thomas in addition to Aristotle in 2 Metaphysicæ, cap. 2, one can read the same
1, contr. Gent., cap. 3, et lib. 2, cap. 16, et lib. 3, cap. 17, Saint Thomas in cont. Gentiles lib. 1, cap. 3 and lib. 2, cap. 16 and lib. 3,
et Scotus, in 1, distinct. 2, quæst. 1, et Durandus, distinct. 3, cap. 17, Scotus in 1, distinct. 2, q. 1, and Durandus in distinct. 3, q. 1.
quæst. 1. Atque hinc sequitur, primum actum hominis incip- And from here it follows that the first act of a human beginning to oper-
ientis operari humano modo necessario esse debere circa aliq- 135R ate in a human way necessarily must be about something in the manner
135 uid per modum finis ultimi saltem negative: quia necesse est, ut of an ultimate end at least negatively. Because it is necessary that some-
aliquid propter se ametur, ut possint alia propter ipsum amari: thing be loved for its own sake so that other things can be loved for
illud autem, quod propter se amatur, ut sic habet rationem ul- its sake. That, however, which is loved for its own sake so that it thus
timi, quia ut sic, non refertur in aliud: si enim referretur, jam has the character of an ultimate [end], because it is such, is not directed
illud aliud esset prius amatum. 140R towards something else. For if it were directed, that other thing would
be prior in being loved.
140	Instantia una
contra proxime
dicta diluitur.
6. Dices primo, nonne satis erit ut antecedat voluntas, 6. [But] you may say first: will it not be enough that the will or One objection
against what was
just said is
resolved.
seu intentio boni in communi? Respondetur, posse hanc in- an intention of the good in general goes before?7 It is answered: it is
tentionem esse omnium primam, non tamen esse satis ut ex possible that this intention comes first, yet it is not enough so that a
illa progrediatur homo immediate ad electiones faciendas, sed 145R human can immediately proceed from it to the choices that must be
necesse est ut prius figat intentionem in aliquo particulari ob- made. Rather, it is necessary that he first fix an intention on some par-
145 jecto propter se amando, quia media, et executio eorum ver- ticular object that ought to be loved for its own sake, because means and
santur circa singularia, et ideo non habent determinatam utili- their execution have to do with singular things. And, therefore, they do
tatem vel proportionem, donec cum re aliqua determinata con- not have determinate usefulness or proportion until they are brought
ferantur, quæ per illa consequenda sit, et ideo illa generalis in- 150R together with some determinate thing which is to be obtained through
tentio non sufficit ac movet, et excitat ad amandum particulare them. For this reason that general intention does not suffice either to
150 bonum, quod sub illo communi continetur. move or to excite to loving a particular good which is contained under
that general [good].
Instantia altera. 7. Dices secundo, quia fieri potest ut amor alicujus boni 7. Secondly, you may say: for it can happen that love of some de- A second
objection.	determinati, verbi gratia, honoris, præcesserit ante usum ra- 155R terminate good (honour, for example) occurs before the use of reason
tionis, et postea adveniente usu rationis, ex vi illius fieri elec- and afterwards by a developing use of reason choices are made because
tiones: ergo fieri potest ut prima operatio humana sit circa of the force of it [i.e., the love]. Therefore, it can happen that the
155	Soluitur 1. bonum tantum propter aliud amatum. Respondetur, etiamsi first human action is concerned with a good only loved for the sake
concederemus totum, non esse contra assertionem positam, of something else. I answer: even if we conceded the whole point, it It is resolved,
first.	quia illud est per accidens, nos vero per se loquimur de homine, 160R would not be against the posited assertion, because that [example] is
qui simpliciter incepit operari, verbi gratia, Adam cum pri- per accidens; we, however, speak per se concerning a human, who began
mum creatus fuit: et idem est de Christo, de Beata Virgine to act strictly speaking (for example, Adam when first created; and the
160	Secundo. et de Angelis. Secundo dicitur in eo eventu cum ante elec- same is true of Christ, the Blessed Virgin, and of the angels). Secondly, Secondly.
7This objector is going in the other direction, by suggesting that we can get by with even less, i.e., all we need is a recognition that something is good. Cf. 3.6.1.

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 1 6
tionem antecedere debeat consultatio, necessarium etiam esse, it is said that in the event when deliberation ought to go before choice
moraliter <28> loquendo, ut præcedat intentio rationalis, qua 165R it is also necessary, morally speaking, that rational intention go before,
velit homo consequi finem illum per convenientia media, hæc by which [intention] a human wills to follow that end through appro-
enim est, quæ movet ad consultationem; unde non sufficit ille priate means. This [intention], indeed, is what moves to deliberation.
165 quasi naturalis affectus, qui potest antecedere. Hence, that natural, as it were, affection which can precede does not
suffice.

-- 6 of 6 --
