Last revision: January 8, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS, PROŒMIUM1
© Sydney Penner 2011
<[xiii]>2
PROŒMIUM. PREFACE.
De objecto seu
materia huius
operis.
1. Divus Thomas in præfatione ad hanc theologiæ partem pro- 1. In the preface to this part of the Summa Theologiæ, St. Thomas says Concerning the
object or matter
of this work.
ponit in materiam et objectum, seu subjectum ejus, hominem, ut that its matter and object or subject is humanity as made in the image of
ad imaginem Dei conditum, id est, ratione et libertate utentem, God, that is, as using reason and freedom, for the image of God shines
5 secundum hoc enim maxime relucet in homine Dei imago: alibi 5R forth most in following these. But elsewhere (that is, the preface to ques-
vero (hoc est, prima parte in fronte quæstionis 2, inter traden- tion 2 in the first part, while giving the general division of theology) he
dam generalem theologiæ divisionem) ait finem potius illius esse says that its goal is rather to discuss the return of rational creatures to
tractare de reditu creaturæ rationalis in Deum: unde et subjec- God. Hence, many gathered that the subject is also not humanity, but
tum non hominem esse, sed Deum, ut finem ultimum, multi col- God as ultimate end. Nor does that seem unsuitable to reason, inasmuch
10 legerunt. Neque id videtur rationi dissentaneum, totius namque 10R as God is the object of all of theology. In the way that a part preserves
theologiæ objectum Deus est; quare ut pars cum toto propor- proportion with the whole, it is necessary that all parts of theology, es-
tionem servet, oportet, ut omnes theologiæ partes, præsertim pecially the major parts and even more the primary parts, discuss God,
majores, magisque præcipuæ, de Deo disputent, eo vel maxime given the fact that it belongs to the perfection of theology to consider
quod ad perfectionem theologiæ spectat Deum sub omni ra- God in every aspect and relation. And since there was a discussion of God
15 tione, atque habitudine considerare: cumque in priore parte the- 15R in the first part of the Summa Theologiæ, both in absolute aspect apart
ologiæ disputatum sit de Deo; tum sub ratione absoluta a crea- from creatures insofar as he is one and three and also according to the re-
turis, quatenus unus et trinus est, tum etiam secundum habi- lation of first cause or principle of creatures, it is necessary that in another
tudinem primæ causæ, seu principii creaturarum, necesse est ut part of the Summa Theologiæ—namely, the one we are approaching—he
in parte alia theologiæ nimirum quam aggredimur, de ipso, ut is discussed as ultimate end, in which case God is its object.
20 de ultimo fine disseratur, eoque pacto sit ejus objectum. Neque 20R But neither are these contrary to each other; rather, they concern
vero hæc inter se sunt contraria, sed eodem revolvuntur, si enim the same thing. For if we speak about the proximate matter to which this
loquamur de materia proxima, in qua versatur hæc doctrina, non doctrine is directed, there is no doubt that it is human beings as acting
est dubium eam esse hominem ut libere operantem, et per ac- freely and tending through free action to their happiness. Another proof
tionem liberam in suam beatitudinem tendentem, quod nunc is not now needed, but it will be clear from use itself and it will be shown
25 alia probatione non eget, sed ipso usu constabit, et ex prox- 25R by the things that are to be said shortly. If, however, the discussion is
ime dicendis declarabitur. Si autem de primaria ratione ma- about the primary reason for discussing this matter, God as ultimate end
teriam hanc tractandi sit sermo, rectissime dicitur Deus, ut fi- is most rightly said to the subject of this very work, which the several
1Latin text is from the Vivés edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not always
in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
13 magisque ] om. V.

-- 1 of 3 --

Suárez, De fine hominis, proœmium 2
nis ultimus, subjectum hujusce operis, quod plus rationes factæ reasons given show.
probant.
30	Cur theologi
rationem finis
ultimi per
ordinem solum
ad hominem
pertractant.
2. Quæret vero aliquis: cum Deus non sit solum finis ho- 2. But someone will ask: since God is not only the end for human Why theologians
discuss the nature
of the ultimate
only in relation
to humanity.
minis, sed terminus etiam omnium creaturarum, cur theologi 30R beings but also the terminus for all creatures, why do theologians when
ad explicandum in Deo rationem finis ultimi, in homine tantum explaining the nature of the ultimate end in God show this only in the
illum declarent, considerando videlicet, quo modo beatitudo ho- case of human beings—namely, by considering in what way human hap-
minis consistat in Deo, et quibus actibus illum assequatur potius piness consists in God and by what acts it is pursued in man—rather than
35 quam in aliis creaturis. in the case of other creatures?
Respondetur varias posse reddi hujus rei causas, quas bre- 35R I respond that various reasons can be given for this. I will touch on
viter attingam, quoniam amplitudinem, dignitatem et difficul- them briefly, since the breadth, worth, and difficulty of this teaching are
tatem hujus doctrinæ manifestant. obvious.
Ratio 1. 3. Prima est, quoniam si homo cum inferioribus creaturis 3. The first reason is that if human beings are compared to lower The 1st reason.
40 conferatur, solus ipse Deum in se ipso proxime et immediate at- creatures, only humans attain God himself proximately and immediately
tingit, et consequitur præcognitionem et amorem: atque ita sin- 40R in himself and pursue precognition and love. And so God is the ultimate
gulari modo est Deus finis ultimus humanæ naturæ: aliæ vero end of human nature in a singular way. But other creatures are said to
res solum remote, et secundum quamdam imitationem dicuntur tend to God only remotely and according to a kind of imitation. If, how-
in Deum tendere. Si autem comparetur superioribus creaturis, ever, human beings are compared to higher creatures, God indeed has
45 habet quidem Deus respectu illarum eamdem rationem ultimi fi- the same nature of an ultimate end with respect to the higher creatures.
nis, tamen quia in hoc fere ejusdem rationis est, respectu Angelo- 45R Yet because there is in this almost the same nature with respect to both
rum et hominum; ideo quæ in hac parte de homine dicuntur, angels and men, therefore what is said in this part concerning human be-
per similitudinem ad beatitudinem Angelorum extendi possunt. ings can be extended by analogy to the happiness of angels. But if angels
Quod si in modo consequendi beatitudinem aliquid proprium have something singular or that only belongs to them in their way of
50 aut singulare habent Angeli, <xiv> illud et minus notum est following happiness, that thing both is less known to human beings and
hominibus, et tractando de natura Angelorum brevissime a the- 50R is briefly explained by theologians when discussing the nature of angels,
ologis expenditur, quoniam etiam ad utilitatem humanam minus since it is also less necessary for human utility.
est necessaria.
Ratio 2. 4. Secunda causa est, quia doctrina hæc non tantum est 4. The second second reasons is that this doctrine is not only spec- The 2nd reason.
55 speculativa, sed etiam practica et moralis; quod enim Aristote- ulative but also practical and moral. For Aristotle said this about moral
les 1 Ethicorum, cap. 7, et lib. 2, cap. 2, de Philosophia morali philosophy in Nicomachean Ethics Book 1, Chapter 7, and Book 2, Chap-
dixit, in hac etiam parte cum theologia convenit, scilicet non esse 55R ter 2, (in which part he also agrees with theology), namely, that it is not
tantum propter cognitionem, sed propter actionem etiam, atque only for the sake of cognition but also for the sake of action and so that
ut boni efficiamur; ad doctrinam autem moralem maxime fuit we may bring about good. Moreover, cognition of human beings them-
60 necessaria homini cognitio sui ipsius, et actionum suarum, non selves and of their actions was most necessary to human beings for moral
autem aliarum creaturarum, nisi quatenus huic morali doctrinæ doctrine, but cognition of other creatures was not except insofar as they
deservire potest. 60R can be subject to this moral doctrine.
Ratio 3. 5. Tertia et optima causa addi potest, quia in homine, ut 5. The third and best reason can be added, because in humanity, The 3rd reason.
dixit S. Gregorius, hom. 29, in Evang., quodammodo omnes as St. Gregory said in the 29th sermon on the Gospels, all creatures are
65 creaturæ continentur, et in eo omnes assequuntur suam felici- contained in a certain way and in humanity they all attain their felicity
56 2 ] 7 V.

-- 2 of 3 --

Suárez, De fine hominis, proœmium 3
tatem et beatitudinem, quatenus illius possunt esse capaces. and happiness, to the extent that they are capable of it.
Ratio 4. 6. Quarta denique, quia ex divina institutione et ordina- 65R 6. The fourth reason, finally, is that all creatures are ordered to the The 4th reason.
tione omnes creaturæ ad salutem hominum ordinatæ sunt, et prosperity of humanity by divine institution and ordering, and the whole
tota ratio divinæ providentiæ quodam modo in gubernando ac nature of divine providence is placed in a certain way in the governing
70 dirigendo hominem ad suum finem posita est. Unde fit, ut om- and directing of human beings to their end. Hence, it happens that all
nia divina opera et mysteria, præsertim supernaturalia, propter divine works and mysteries, especially supernatural [ones], are made for
salutem humanam, maxime electorum, facta sint, atque ita con- 70R the sake of the prosperity of humanity, especially for the sake of the pros-
siderando de homine, et de mediis, quibus ad finem suum per- perity of the elect. And so in considering human beings and the means
ducitur, tota ratio divinæ providentiæ quodammodo exhauritur, by which they are led to their end, the whole nature of divine providence
75 quantum ab hominibus cognosci potest. Atque hinc satis con- is exhausted in a certain way, insofar as it can be known by human s. And
stat, quid sit objectum hujus partis. hence it is clear enough what the object of this part is.
1. Corollar. ex
dictis.
7. Ex quo colligitur primo, qua ratione theologia, quamvis 75R 7. From here is gathered, first, for what reason theology, although it The first
corollary of what
has been said.
scientia divina sit, de humanis rebus disputet: duplici enim titulo is the divine science, debates human matters. For this label may be read
hoc præstat; primo, quia hoc necessarium fuit ad explicandam in two ways. First, because this was necessary for explaining the nature
80 in Deo rationem finis ultimi. Secundo, quia non considerat hæc of the ultimate end in God. Second, because it does not consider these
moralia ut naturali lumine manifestantur, sed ut virtute conti- morals as manifested by the natural light, but as they are virtually con-
nentur in principiis a Deo revelatis, atque ideo eadem est ratio 80R tained in the principles revealed by God. And for this reason the whole
totius theologiæ, et hujus partis, scilicet divinum lumen, et reve- of theology and this part are of the same nature, namely, divine light and
latio, aut prima veritas, quatenus mediate, aut per discursum ap- revelation or first truth, insofar as by means of or through discursive rea-
85 plicatur conclusionibus in principiis fidei virtualiter contentis: soning it is applied to conclusions virtually contained in the principles of
in quo maxime differt hæc doctrina a morali philosophia hu- the faith. These doctrines differ especially in this respect from a human
mana, seu pure acquisita. 85R or purely acquired moral philosophy.
2. Corallar. 8. Secundo colligitur ratio methodi, et ordinis hujus trac- 8. Second, a reason for the method and ordering of this treatise is The second
corollary.	tationis: doctrina enim moralis et practica, ut perfecte, ac per gathered. For moral and practical doctrine, so that it can be propounded
90 modum scientiæ tradi potest, supponit speculativam scientiam. perfectly and in the manner of science, presupposes speculative science.
Item cognitio de Deo sub aliqua habitudine ad creaturas sup- Likewise, cognition of God under some relation to creatures presupposes
ponit cognitionem ipsius Dei in se: et ad cognoscendum reditum 90R a cognition of God himself as he is in himself. And in order to learn about
creaturarum in Deum, oportet prius emanationem earumdem the return of creatures to God, it is necessary first to explain their emana-
ab ipso explicare, et ideo postquam de Deo, et de operibus cre- tion from God. For this reason, after we have spoken about God and his
95 atis diximus, in hoc consequenti opere reditum creaturarum in created works, in this subsequent work we discuss generally the return
Deum, atque adeo moralem doctrinam, qua pervenitur ad Deum of creatures to God and even the moral doctrine—namely, the principles
trademus generaliter, principia scilicet et fundamenta virtutum 95R and foundations of all the virtues and moral actions—by which they are
omnium et actionum moralium. In specie vero, hoc est, de sin- brought to God. But in the species, that is concerning individual virtues,
gulis virtutibus, eam tantum doctrinam in lucem damus, quæ we bring to light only that teaching which is useful for explaining the
100 ad tres virtutes theologicas, aut eis affinem religionem exponen- three theological virtues or connected religious matters. But because, as
das opportuna est. Quoniam vero, ut Aristoteles testatur, prin- Aristotle bears witness, the beginning of all moral things is the end, we,
cipium rerum omnium moralium est finis, ideo ab ultimo fine 100R therefore, begin the discussion by talking about the ultimate end.
disputare incipimus.
76 quid ] quod A.

-- 3 of 3 --
