Last revision: January 14, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 1, SECT. 51
© Sydney Penner 2011
<10, col. b>2
Quomodo se habeat finis ad objectum adæquatum voluntatis. How the end is related to the adequate object of the will.
Non videri finem
adæquatum
objectum
voluntatis.
1. Decisio hujus quæstionis ex præcedenti haberi potest, et a 1. A settling of this question can be reached from the previous one. It is It does not seem
that the end is an
adequate object
of the will.
D. Thoma tangitur 1, 2, quæst. 1, art. 1 , eritque utilis ad ea quæ also touched on by St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.1.1. And it will be useful
dicenda sunt, et ideo breviter præmittenda. Ratio autem dubi- for those things which are to be discussed and therefore should briefly
5 tandi est, quia objectum adæquatum voluntatis est bonum: dix- 5R be presented. Moreover, the reason for doubting is that the adequate
imus autem, non omne bonum habere causalitatem finis, sed object of the will is good. We said, moreover, that not every good has
solum illud, quod est propter se amabile, non autem bonum the causality of an end, but only that good which is lovable for its own
utile, ut sic. Unde Aristoteles 1, Magnor. moral., cap. 5: Bono- sake. Useful good as such, however, does not. Hence, Aristotle says
rum, inquit, quædam sunt finis, quædam vero non: unde conclu- in Magna moralia I, cap. 5: ‘Of goods certain ones are ends but certain
10 ditur argumentum, quia voluntatis objectum est omne id, circa 10R others not’. From which the argument is concluded: since everything
quod voluntas versatur, non solum autem versatur circa finem, to which the will is directed is an object of the will, but it is directed not
sed etiam circa media: ergo non est finis objectum adæquatum. only to the end but also to means, therefore the end is not the adequate
Arguitur
contrarium ex
D. Thom.
In contrarium autem est, quia divus Thomas, citato articulo object. To the contrary, however, because St. Thomas in the cited first The contrary is
argued from
St. Thomas.
primo, dicit, finem esse objectum voluntatis; et videtur loqui article says that the end is the object of the will. And he seems to be
15 de objecte adæquato, quia alias non recte concluderet volun- 15R talking about an adequate object, because otherwise he does not rightly
tatem omnia operari secundum rationem finis, quia potentia conclude that the will does everything following the nature of an end
operatur omnia sub ratione objecti sui: est enim hoc verum since a power does everything under the aspect of its object. For this is
de objecto adæquato, et non de alio, et ideo comparat divus true of an adequate object and not of others. For this reason St. Thomas
Thomas finem respectu voluntatis colori respectu visus: est compares an end with respect to the will to colour with respect to sight.
20	Item ex Arist. autem color objectum adæquatum visus. Confirmari potest 20R Colour, moreover, is the adequate object of sight. It can be confirmed Likewise from
Aristotle.	ex Aristotele 2, Physic., capite tertio, dicente, finem et bonum from Aristotle, Physics II, cap. 3, ‘the end and the good are the same’,
idem esse: et 1, Ethic., capite septimo, illud esse uniuscujusque rei and from EN I, cap. 7, ‘that is the good for each thing for the sake of
bonum, cujus gratia operatur: ergo sicut bonum, ita et finis est which it acts’. Therefore, just as good is the adequate object of the will,
objectum adæquatum voluntatis, quia quidquid voluntas amat so also is the end, because whatever the will loves is an end or for the
25 est finis, vel propter finem. 25R sake of an end.
Auctorum
varietas in
præsenti quæst.
2. <11> In hac re, qui affirmant, media, ut media, 2. In this matter, those who affirm that means, as means, have the The difference of
authors on the
present question.
habere causalitatem finis, facile concedunt, finem esse objec- causality of an end easily concede that an end is an adequate object of
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not
always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 1, sec. 5 2
tum adæquatum voluntatis sub fine media comprehendendo. the will by including means under the end. But others, who deny that,
Alii vero, qui illud negant, docent, finem esse objectum prin- teach that an end is the principal object of the will because everything
30 cipale voluntatis, quia omnia, quæ voluntas vult, aliquo modo 30R that the will wishes is in some way ordered to the end. It is, however,
ordinantur in finem: non tamen adæquatum, quia non quidquid not adequate, because not anything whatever that the will wishes is an
voluntas vult, est finis. Alii autem distinctione utuntur. Con- end. Others, moreover, use a distinction. Conradus, at the cited art. 1,
radus, ad citatum art. 1, distinguit duplex objectum voluntatis, distinguishes a two-fold object of the will: namely, per se and per acci-
scilicet per se, et per accidens, et dicit, objectum adæquatum dens. And he says that the adequate object per se, more motive than
35 per se, tam motivum, quam terminativum esse finem, media 35R terminative, is the end, but means are only objects per accidens. Finally,
vero solum esse objecta per accidens. Alii denique Thomistæ others of the Thomists distinguish between motive and terminative ob-
distinguunt de objecto motivo et terminativo, et docent, finem jects and teach that the end is an adequate motive object of the will, but
esse adæquatum objectum motivum voluntatis: non autem ter- not an [adequate] terminative [object], because acts of the will are also
minativum, quia voluntatis actus etiam ad media terminan- terminated at means.
40 tur. Et hæc sententia magis ad veritatem accedit, quam alio 40R And this view comes closer to the truth, which I show in another
modo, ita declaro. Possumus enim loqui aut de objecto for- way as follows: for we can speak either of the formal object which is the
mali, quod est voluntati ratio operandi: aut de materiali ob- reason for the will’s acting or of the material object concerning which
jecto, circa quod voluntas operatur, ut videre licet in exemplis the will acts, as may be seen in the examples given above in the preced-
supra positis, sectione præcedenti, num. 5, de amore proximi ing section, n. 5, in the case of love for one’s neighbour for the sake of
45 propter Deum, vel adorationis imaginis propter rem repræsen- 45R God or of adoration of an image for the sake of the thing represented.
tatam: nam res, quæ amatur, vel adoratur, est divina voluntas, For the thing that is loved or adored is the divine will or the excellence
vel excellentia præcepti, et ideo merito datur objectum formale of the precepts and for this reason the formal object is justifiably given
in istis. in those.
1. Assertio unde
probetur.
3. Dico ergo primo, rationem adæquatam operandi volun- 3. Therefore, I say, first, that the adequate reason for the will’s Whence the first
assertion may be
shown.
50 tatis, atque adeo formale objectum adæquatum voluntatis esse 50R acting will—and therefore the adequate formal object of the will—is the
finem. Hanc existimo esse mentem divi Thomæ, loco citato, end. I consider this to be the mind of St. Thomas in the cited place and
et eam probant, quæ posteriori loco adducta sunt in ratione those things which were brought up in following place in the reason for
dubitandi: et sequitur ex dictis in sectione præcedenti, quia doubting prove it. And it follows from what was said in the preceding
tota causalitas finis est in ipso fine non solum respectu sui, sed section, because the complete causality of the end is in the end itself not
55 etiam respectu mediorum: ergo solus finis est adæquata ratio 55R only with respect to itself but also with respect to the means. Therefore,
operandi voluntatis, quia illud est voluntatis ratio operandi, the end alone is the adequate reason for the acting of the will, because
Nota
exceptionem.
quod illam attrahit, seu movet ad operandum. Est autem ad- that which draws the will or moves it to action is its reason for acting.
vertendum, sermonem esse de voluntate operandi proprie ex It should be noted, however, that the discussion is about wills acting Note the
exception.	causalitate finis, in qua non solum exterior effectus, sed etiam properly by causality of an end in which not only the exterior effect
60 interior actus est ex causalitate finis: nam si sit sermo de divina 60R but also the interior act is from the causality of the end. For if the
voluntate amante Deum ipsum propter summam bonitatem, discussion were about the divine will loving God himself for the sake
objectum ejus proprie non est finis: quia ille actus non est ex of the highest good, its object is not properly the end since that act does
causalitate finis: tamen in hoc habet proportionem, quod est de not result from the causality of the end. Nevertheless, it is analogous in
43 licet ] est V.

-- 2 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 1, sec. 5 3
re propter se bona et amabili, quamvis sine causalitate propter that it is of the thing that is good and lovable in itself, although without
65 summam perfectionem. <col. b> 65R causality on account of the highest perfection [of God].
Obiectio. 4. Sed objicies, quia interdum voluntas nostra operatur 4. But you will object because sometimes our will acts for the sake An objection.
circa aliquod objectum, nec intendendo illud ut finem, nec eli- of some object, neither intending it as end nor choosing it for the sake
gendo propter finem, sed per simplicem quamdam complacen- of an end, but willing it through a kind of simple complacency with an
tiam volendo illud actu imperfecto, quem velleitatem vocant: imperfect act that they call a ‘velleity’. Therefore, the reason for such
70 ergo ratio talis actus nullo modo est finis. Cujus signum etiam 70R an act is in no way an end. It is also a sign of this that such an act is also
est, quia talis actus versatur etiam circa rem impossibilem: finis directed to an impossible thing. An end, however, since it expresses
autem cum dicat ordinem ad esse, et ad executionem, semper order to being and to execution, is always something possible.
Dilutio. est aliquid possibile. Respondetur hujusmodi actum semper I respond that an act of this sort is always directed to the object The resolution.
versari circa objectum, propter aliquam bonitatem, quæ in ipso for the sake of some goodness that appears in it, either absolutely or
75 apparet, vel absolute, vel sub aliqua conditione: et hoc modo 75R under some condition. And in this way that act is also by a causality
etiam ille actus est ex causalitate finis, quia tale objectum per il- of an end, because such an object through that goodness moves and
lam bonitatem movet et trahit illam voluntatem ad eliciendum draws that will to eliciting a simple affect and in this way that act is also
simplicem affectum, et hoc modo etiam ille actus est ex causal- by causality of an end, not indeed as it expresses order to intention or
itate finis, non quidem ut dicit ordinem ad intentionem, vel execution, concerning which the argument made works, but only as it
80 executionem, de quo procedit argumentum factum, sed solum 80R expresses order to the effect of the will which it excites.
ut dicit ordinem ad effectum voluntatis, quem excitat.
2. Assertio unde
probetur.
5. Dico secundo, finem non esse objectum materiale 5. I say, secondly, that the end is not the adequate material object of Whence the
second assertion
may be shown.
adæquatum voluntatis. Hoc probat prior ratio dubitandi in the will. The first reason for doubting posited in the beginning shows
principio posita: quia voluntas etiam versatur circa media: nec this. For the will is also directed to means. Not only objects per accidens
85 recte appellantur media solum objecta per accidens voluntatis, of the will are rightly called means, according to that way by which
ad eum modum, quo substantia, verbi gratia, dicitur objectum 85R substance, for example, is called the object per accidens of sight (for a
per accidens visus, nam potentia non attingit per proprium ac- power does not reach through a proper act of this sort a per accidens
tum hujusmodi objectum per accidens, sed solum attingit ob- object but only reaches a per se object that is connected to a per accidens
jectum per se, quod conjungitur objecto per accidens, quod object, which receives this denomination very remotely and extrinsi-
90 valde remote et extrinsece accipit hanc denominationem: at cally). But, on the other hand, the will is truly and properly directed
vero voluntas vere ac proprie versatur circa media immediate 90R to means immediately and in itself attains them through a proper act
et in se attingendo illa per proprium actum distinctum ab illo, distinct from that by which it is directed to an end as the object which
quo versatur circa finem ut objectum quod intendit per actum it intends through an act of election, by which it immediately wishes
electionis, quo immediate vult et eligit ipsa media: comprehen- and chooses the means themselves. Therefore, they are comprehended
95 duntur ergo sub objecto per se, quamvis materiali. under the per se object, although material.
Quæstiuncula
suborta, an
medium simul et
finis sint
adæquatum
objectum
voluntatis.
Scoti responsio.
6. Sed quæret aliquis, an totum materiale objectum volun- 95R 6. But someone will ask whether the whole material object of the A small question
that has arisen:
whether a means
and end at the
same time are an
adequate object
of the will.
The response of
Scotus.
tatis comprehendatur sub hoc disjuncto, finis vel medii: nam will is comprehended under this disjunction: end or means. For Scotus
Scotus, in 1, distinct. 1, quæst. 3, negat, quia potest voluntas, in [Sent.] I, dist. 1, q. 3 denies [it] ‘because the will can’, he says, ‘have
inquit, habere aliquem actum, qui nec versetur circa finem, nec some act which is directed neither to an end nor to a means’. For the
100 circa media, quia potest voluntas esse de bono nec propter will can be of the good neither for its own sake (which regards the end)
se, quod spectat ad finem; nec propter aliud quod pertinet 100R nor for the sake of something else (which pertains to means), but it

-- 3 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 1, sec. 5 4
ad media, sed abstrahere de bono ut sic, abstrahendo a bono abstracts concerning the good as such, abstracting from the good for
propter se, vel propter aliud: hoc enim objectum apprehendi its own sake or for the sake of something else. For this object can be
potest <12> per intellectum, qui quamlibet rationem realem apprehended through the intellect, which can abstract any real nature
105 potest abstrahere, et est sufficiens ad movendam voluntatem: you please, and it is sufficient for moving the will. Therefore, it is also
ergo est etiam sufficiens materia circa quam versatur actus ejus. 105R sufficient matter for its act to be directed to it. Indeed, it also follows—
Imo etiam sequitur contra priorem assertionem, formalem ra- contra the prior assertion—that the formal objective reason for such an
tionem objectivam talis actus non esse finem, sed aliquid ab- act is not the end but something abstract and more general than the end.
stractum, et universalius fine. Et pro hac sententia citari solent Other nominalists (Ockham, Gabriel, Major, and others), I, dist. 1, are
110 alii Nominales in illa distinctione prima, Ocham, Gabriel, Ma- usually cited for this view. They say that a middle act is given between
jor et alii, qui dicunt, dari actum medium inter cæcitatem et 110R blindness and sight. But perhaps these were speaking in another sense,
visum: sed hi fortasse alio sensu locuti sunt, ut videbimus infra as we will see below in dealing with these acts.
agentes de his actibus.
Vera resolutio. 7. Dicendum tamen est, omnia objecta voluntatis suffi- 7. It should, however, be said that all objects of the will are suffi- The true
resolution.	115 cienter comprehendi sub fine et mediis intelligendo, ut dixi, ciently comprehended under the end and means by understanding, as
nomine finis, quidquid propter suam bonitatem amatur, sive we said, by the name ‘end’ whatever is loved for the sake of its good-
ametur actu efficaci, sive non efficaci, sive sit primario inten- 115R ness, either loved with an efficacious act or not, either with a primary
tum, sive secundario, tanquam quid conjunctum fini primario. intention or with a secondary intention as something conjoined with a
Probatur
auctoritate.
Hæc conclusio colligitur ex Aristotele 3, Ethicor., cap. 3 et 4, primary end. This conclusion is gathered from Aristole, EN III, cap. 3 It is proved by
authority.	120 quatenus in rationibus, quibus ibi utitur distinguit fines, et me- and 4, since in the arguments which he uses here he distinguishes ends
dia tanquam duo membra complectentia totum objectum vol- and means as two members making up the entire object of the will.
untatis. Et eodem modo philosophatur Nyssenus sive Neme- 120R And Gregory of Nyssa or Nemesius philosophizes in the same way
sius, lib. 5 Philosophiæ, cap. 4, et Damascenus, lib. 2, de Fide, in Philosophiæ V, cap. 4; John of Damascus in de Fide II, cap. 22; and
cap. 22, et D. Augustinus 1, de Doct. Christian., cap. 8, ubi St. Augustine in de Doct. Christ. I, cap. 8, where he calls all goods lov-
125 omnia bona a voluntate amabilia ad ea revocat quibus utendum able by the will ‘which are to be used or enjoyed’. The same is taken
est, vel fruendum. Idem sumitur ex D. Thoma 1, cont. Gent., from St. Thomas, SCG I, cap. 86 and ST IaIIæ.8, where Cajetan in art. 1
cap. 86, et 1, 2, q. 8, ubi Cajetanus, art. 1, aliique etiam 125R and also other Thomists follow this. [Also,] Gregory in 1, dub., q. 1.
Thomistæ hoc sequuntur: Gregorius, in 1, dubion., q. 1. Pro- It is proven by reason, because every good is loved either for its Likewise by
reason.	Item ratione. batur ratione, quia omne bonum amatur, vel propter se, vel own sake or for the sake of something else; therefore, either as end or
130 propter aliud; ergo vel ut finis, vel ut medium: sed illa duo as means. But these two are opposed as a contradiction, because in an
opponuntur contradictorie, quia in objecto, quod propter se object which is loved for its own sake, as such, is included a negation,
amatur, ut sic, includitur negatio, videlicet, quod non ame- 130R namely, that it is not loved for the sake of the goodness of something
tur propter bonitatem alterius: ergo inter illa duo non potest else. Therefore, no intermediate can be found between these two, be-
medium inveniri, quia hoc ipso, quod medium non ordinetur cause by the very fact that a means is not ordered to another for the sake
135 ad aliud, propter quod amatur, amabitur propter se: et ostendo of which it is loved means that it will be loved for its own sake. And
sic, quia quidquid amatur a voluntate est bonum, honestum, I show it in this way: because whatever is loved by the will is good—
delectabile, aut utile: sed duo priora habent rationem finis, 135R honest, pleasurable, or useful. But the former two have the nature of
quantum est de se, quia ex se habent unde amentur: quod si an end, insofar as concerns themselves, because they have in themselves
interdum ad aliud referantur, est illis extrinsecum, et tunc in- that for which they are loved. If sometimes they are referred to another,

-- 4 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 1, sec. 5 5
140 ducunt rationem medii. Tertium autem bonum, scilicet utile, it is extrinsic to them and then they introduce the nature of a means.
propriam habet rationem medii. But the third good, namely, useful good, has the proper nature of a
140R means.
Euasio Scoti
occluditur.
8. Ad hoc respondet Scotus posse amari bonum, vel con- 8. Scotus responds to this that it is possible for the good or the Scotus’s evasion
is blocked.	veniens, ut ab his omnibus abstrahit: sed hoc non recte dicitur, agreeable to be loved as it is abstracted from all these. But this is not
quia bonum aut est tale per intrinsecam bonitatem aut solum rightly said, because the good either is such through intrinsic goodness
145 per habitudinem ad extrinsecam bonitatem: priori modo ha- [or through extrinsic goodness]. In the first way it has the nature of
bet rationem finis, posteriori vero rationem medii: non potest 145R an end, but in the latter it has the nature of a means. Moreover, one
autem abstrahi una ratio communis utrique, quia in hujusmodi general nature cannot be abstracted from either, because in this sort
analogia non datur ratio communis objectiva, sicut non potest of analogy a common objective nature is not given, just as it cannot be
intelligi quod aliquis amet sanum in communi, ut abstrahit ab understood that someone loves health in general as abstracted from that
150 eo quod formaliter intrinsece sanum est, et ab eo quod dicitur which is formally intrinsically healthy and from that which is called
tale per habitudinem ad sanitatem: sed unusquisque amat sani- 150R such through a habitude to healthiness. But each one loves healthiness
tatem propter seipsam: signum vero, vel instrumenta sanitatis for its own sake, but a sign or instrument of healthiness for the sake
propter ipsam: sic igitur quando quis amat bonum in com- of it. So therefore when someone loves good in general, he really loves
muni, revera amat illud quod est in se, et per se conveniens, that which is in itself and per se agreeable and that is the appetite for
155 et ille est appetitus finis non in particulari, sed in communi, the end not in particular but in general. Moreover, by descending to
descendendo autem ad particularia bona, nullum est quod ab 155R particular goods, nothing is such that it is abstracted from those two
illis duabus rationibus abstrahat, scilicet propter se, vel propter natures, namely, for the sake of itself or for the sake of something else.
aliud: igitur finis et media exhauriunt totum objectum volun- Therefore, an end and means exhaust the entire object of the will.
tatis.
144–145 aut solum per habitudinem ad extrinsecam bonitatem ] om. V.

-- 5 of 5 --
