Last revision: December 29, 2010	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS, DISP. 16, SECT. 11
© Sydney Penner 2010
<149, col. b>2
DE APPETITU BEATITUDINIS. CONCERNING THE DESIRE FOR HAPPINESS.
Divus Thomas, 1, 2, in quæstione de consecutione beatitudi- St. Thomas, in the question concerning the attainment of happiness
nis hanc partem addidit de appetitu, imo videri potest, debuisse in the Prima Secundæ, adds this part concerning desire.3 Of course, it
hoc dubium ante alios articulos præmittere, quando tendentia could seem that one ought to discuss this doubt before the other arti-
5 in beatitudinem a naturali appetitu incipit, et ideo forte Soto 5R cles, since a tendency to happiness starts from a natural desire. And
dist. 49, quæst. 2, articul. 1, hunc ordinem mutavit; tamen perhaps for this reason Soto changes the order in dist. 49, q. 2, art. 1.
non immerito D. Thomas hanc disputationem in postremum Nevertheless, it is not without merit that St. Thomas reserves this
locum suæ quæstionis reservavit, quia objectum appetibile prius disputation for the last spot in the question, because the desirable ob-
cognosci debet, quam appetitus, et ideo cognita ratione beati- ject must first be cognized, then desired. And therefore by the ratio
10 tudinis, facilius explicabitur appetitus ejus. Supponenda ergo 10R of happiness having been cognized, the desire for it will be explained
est vulgaris distinctio appetitus innati et eliciti, quorum prior more easily. The common distinction between innate and elicited de-
solum consistit in pondere naturæ, et ideo communis est cum sire should, therefore, be assumed. The former of these only consists
aliis viventibus et inanimatis, et in quibus inest, perpetuo inest; in the weight of nature and is therefore [had in] common with other
posterior vero consistit in actu vitali proveniente ex cognitione: living and inanimate things. And in which it belongs, it forever be-
15 unde est proprium viventium vita animali vel rationali, et solum 15R longs. But the latter consists in a vital act coming forth from cog-
adest quando vivens actu operatur et cognoscit: de utroque est nition. Hence, it is proper to things living by an animal or rational
dicendum tam respectu beatitudinis supernaturalis quam natu- life and is present only when a living thing actually acts and cognizes.
ralis, vel in communi, vel in particulari. Concerning either it should be said as much in respect to supernatural
happiness as to natural, either in general or in particular.
SECTIO I. 20R SECTION I.
20 Utrum homo appetitu innato appetat naturalem beatitudinem in Whether a human being desires with an innate desire natural happiness
parliculari, et in communi? in particular and in general
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the
1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V =
Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3Q. 5, art. 8.
5 Soto ] Scotus V.

-- 1 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 16, sect. 1 2
1. Assertio
affirmat. de
beatitudine in
particulari.
Probatur primo.
1. Primo de beatitudine naturali in particulari res est sine con- 1. First, it is uncontroversial concerning natural happiness in a partic- The 1st assertion
affirmative
concerning
happiness in
particular.
It is proven,
firstly.
troversia, hominem illam appetere appetitu innato: sic omnes, ular thing that a human being desires it with an innate desire. Thus
in 4, dist. 49, Scotus, quæst. 6, Durandus, quæst. 8, Paludanus, 25R everyone [says] in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49: Scotus in q. 6, Durandus in
25 quæst. 7, Major, quæstion. 6. Rationes sunt claræ: primo, quia q. 8, Paludanus in q. 7, and Mair in q. 6. The reasons are clear. First,
in homine est capacitas naturalis ad hanc beatitudinem tam pas- because there is a natural capacity in a human for this happiness as a
siva, quam etiam facultas activa: omnis autem potentia nat- passive and also as an active faculty. Moreover, all powers naturally
uraliter inclinatur ad actum sibi connaturalem, præsertim ad are inclined to the acts co-natural with them, especially to the most
perfectissimum: omne enim perfectibile appetit suam perfec- 30R perfect. For everything perfectible desires its perfection. Happiness,
30 tionem: beatitudo autem, ut sæpe dictum est, est maxima per- moreover, as was often said, is maximal perfection. And if it is natural,
Secundo. fectio, et si naturalis sit, est etiam proportionata. Tandem ap- it is also proportionate.
petitus sciendi maxime naturalis est, beatitudo autem est per- Finally, the appetite for knowing (sciendi) is most natural. Hap- Secondly.
fectissima quædam pars hujus scientiæ. Et idem fieri potest de piness, moreover, is a certain most perfect part of this knowledge (sci-
amore: atque hinc se- <150> quitur, cum dictum sit, hanc beati- 35R entiæ). And the same can happen concerning love. And from this it
35 tudinem consistere in cognitione et amore Dei, hunc appetitum follows, as was said, that this happiness consists in the cognition and
naturaliter tendere in Deum, ut in finem ultimum, proprium et love of God. This appetite naturally tends to God as to an ultimate
particularem, et in cognitionem et amorem ejus, tanquam in il- end, proper and particular, and in the cognition and love of God, just
lius consecutionem. Quod late probat divus Thomas, 3, contra as in the attainment of him. Which St. Thomas shows more broadly
Gentes, capite 25 et sequentibus. Et de hoc ad minimum intellig- 40R in SCG 3, cap. 25 and following. And concerning this at least is under-
40 itur illud Augustini: Fecisti nos Domine ad te, et inquietum est cor stood the statement of Augustine: ‘You made us, Lord, for yourself,
nostrum donec perveniamus ad te, 1, Confess., cap. 1. Rationes and our heart is restless until it reaches you’ (Confess. I, c. 1). The
sunt eædem quæ supra factæ. reasons are the same as the ones given above.
In qua potentia
insit innatus
appetitus ad
beatitud.
1. Opinio.
2. Solent vero inquirere scholastici, in qua facultate hominis 2. But scholastics are accustomed to inquiring in what faculty of In what power
the innate desire
for happiness
belongs.
The 1st opinion.
sit hic appetitus. Paludanus, quem sequitur Soto, existimat esse 45R a human this desire is. Paludanus, whom Soto follows, thinks it is in
45 in voluntate, quia est appetitus totius suppositi, videntur tamen the will, because it is the appetite of the supposed whole. Yet they
in suo discursu æquivocationem committere, et ab appetitu in- seem to commit an equivocation in their discussion and to switch the
nato transferre sermonem ad elicitum. Durandus collocat in in- discussion from innate desire to elicited desire. Durandus places it in
tellectu, in quo etiam existimat esse naturalem appetitum sci- the intellect, in which he also thinks the natural desire for knowledge
endi, quia hic appetitus non distinguitur a capacitate naturali, 50R (sciendi) is, because this desire is not distinguished from a natural ca-
50	2. Opinio. quam unaquæque potentia habet ad actum suum. Alii distinc- pacity, which each power has for its act. Others make use of another The 2nd opinion.
tione utuntur, dicentes, hunc appetitum esse in utraque poten- distinction, saying, this appetite is in either power, yet it is properly
tia, tamen proprie esse in voluntate, sicut etiam esse potest in ap- in the will, just as it can also be in the sensitive appetite in relation to
petitu sensitivo in ordine ad objecta proportionata, quia istæ po- a proportionate object, because those powers tend to good under the
tentiæ tendunt in bonum sub ratione boni; in intellectu vero, et 55R aspect of good. But in the intellect and in other faculties it is improp-
55 in aliis facultatibus esse improprie, quia non tendunt in bonum erly, because they do not tend to good under the aspect of good, but
sub ratione boni, sed sub ratione veri, vel aliis particularibus ra- under the aspect of true or other particular aspects. Thus Fonseca in
tionibus. Ita Fonseca, 1, Metaphysicæ, quæst. 1, sect. 3. Metaph. I, q. 1, sect. 3.
Decisio autoris;
et assertio 1.
3. Mihi videtur fere distinctio, et quæstio de modo lo- 3. To me the distinction and question almost seem to be merely a The decision of
the author and
the 1st assertion.
quendi. Supponendo ergo formaliter beatitudinem includere ac- 60R manner of speaking. Therefore, by supposing that happiness formally

-- 2 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 16, sect. 1 3
60 tum intellectus et voluntatis, est non dubium, quin ex ea parte, includes an act of intellect and will, there is no doubt but that by that
qua includit amorem, appetitus ejus omnino sit in voluntate, ut part by which it includes love its desire is entirely in the will, as Scotus
recte Scotus, non solum quia voluntas est appetitus universalis, rightly [says], not only because the will is the universal appetite, but
sed quia est proprium perfectibile per illum actum: at vero qua because it is properly perfectible through that act. But on the other
parte consistit in actu intellectus proximus appetitus ejus natu- 65R hand by that part which consists in an act of intellect its proximate de-
65 ralis est in intellectu, ut recte probat fundamentum Durandi: si- sire is naturally in the intellect, as the foundation of Durandus rightly
cut etiam appetitus formæ est immediate in materia prima, et in shows. Just as also the appetite for form is immediately in first matter
universum omnis potentia inclinatur in suum actum; et quamvis and in general every power is inclined to its act. And although per-
forte tota hæc appellatio appetitus metaphorica sit in eo modo, haps this complete appellation of desire is metaphorical in that way,
quo est, non est cur dicatur improprius, quia licet intellectus in- 70R by which it is why it is not called improper, because although the in-
70 clinetur ad operandum circa suum objectum sub ratione veri, tellect is inclined to act on account of its object under the aspect of
tamen, ut habet appetitum innatum, inclinatur in suum actum true, yet, so that it has an innate desire, it is inclined to its act under
sub ratio- <col. b> ne boni, et perfectionis sibi convenientis: the aspect of good and the perfection agreeable to it. But in a certain
at vero quodammodo mediate etiam voluntas pondere naturæ way the will also mediately by a weight of nature is inclined to the act
inclinatur in actum intellectus, quia inclinatur ad appetendum 75R of intellect, because it is inclined to desiring through an elicited act
75 per actum elicitum omnem hominis perfectionem, quarum una every human perfection, among which one in particular is this cog-
ex præcipuis est hæc cognitio intellectus: inclinatur ergo volun- nition of the intellect. Therefore the will is inclined to an act of the
tas in actum intellectus, non ut actum suum, sed ut objectum. intellect not as its act but as object. It can be added, if it is true, that
Addi potest, si verum est, hos actus etiam manere immediate ab these acts also remain immediately by the substance itself of the soul,
ipsa substantia animæ, hunc appetitum innatum etiam in ipsa 80R this innate desire also belongs in the substance itself as in a radical and
80 substantia inesse tanquam in radicali, et principali principio illo- primary principle of them, by that general principle that all active
rum, ex illo generali principio, quod omnis vis activa naturaliter strength naturally is disposed to its act.
est propensa ad actum suum.
De appetitu ad
beatitudinem in
communi
autorum
controversia.
4. Jam de beatitudine in communi est nonnulla diversitas 4. Now concerning happiness in general there is some diversity The controversy
among authors
concerning a
desire for
happiness in
general
inter auctores. Scotus, loco citato, et quæst. 1 Prologi negat among the authors. Scotus, in the cited passage and in q. 1 of the
85 habere hominem appetitum innatum ad beatitudinem in com- 85R prologue, denies that humans have an innate desire for happiness in
muni: quia natura, inquit, ad determinatam et particularem per- general. Because nature, he says, tends to determinate and particular
fectionem tendit: unde tendere in universalem, proprium vide- perfection. Hence, to tend to universal [perfection] seems proper to
tur actus eliciti. Quod fundamentum adeo universale non vide- an elicited act. This foundation thus far does not seem universally
tur verum, quia etiam appetitus naturalis potest esse ad objec- true, because a natural desire can also be to an object in general, just
90 tum commune, sicut est appetitus materiæ ad formam: imo 90R as is the appetite of matter to form. Indeed, the very fact that a power
hoc ipso quod potentia potest per actum elicitum appetere ob- can through an elicited act desire a general object seems necessarily to
jectum commune, videtur necessario supponi appetitus innatus assume an innate desire for that good. Yet it can in particular be urged
ad bonum illud: posset tamen in particulari urgeri argumento by the argument of Scotus, because an innate desire is only for true
Scoti, quia appetitus innatus solum est ad veram beatitudinem, happiness, not for false. But this happiness is only one thing in partic-
95 non ad falsam, hæc autem beatitudo tantum est una in particu- 95R ular, namely God and the attainment of him. Therefore, this desire is
84 Prologi ] Trologi V.

-- 3 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis disp. 16, sect. 1 4
lari, scilicet Deus et consecutio ejus: ergo hic appetitus non est not for happiness in general, because it only seems to be general as it
in beatitudinem in communi, quia solum videtur esse communis is abstracted from true and false happiness.
prout abstrahit a vera et falsa beatitudine.
Assertio 2. 5. Nihilominus dicendum est secundo cum communi sen- 5. Nevertheless, it should be said, second, with the common view, Second assertion.
100 tentia, esse in homine naturalem appetitum ab beatitudinem that there is in a human being a natural desire also for happiness in
etiam in communi. Sic reliqui theologi citati: videri potest Ca- 100R general. Thus the rest of the cited theologians [say] and, it can seem,
Suadetur primo. jetanus, 1 p., quæst. 82, art. 1; explicatur primo, quia actus ille Cajetan, p. 1, q. 82, art. 1. It is explained, firstly, because that elicited It is proven,
firstly.	elicitus, quo potest homo amare beatitudinem in communi, est act, by which a human being can love happiness in general is very co-
valde connaturalis et proportionatus naturæ: ergo est in homine natural and proportionate to nature. Therefore, there is in a human
105 appetitus innatus ad amorem illum: ergo et ad beatitudinem in being an innate desire for that love. Therefore, also for happiness in
communi, saltem ut est objectum ejus, quia etiam ipsum objec- 105R general, at least as an object of it, because that whole object is also
Secundo. tum totum est proportionatum naturæ. Secundo, quia licet beat- proportionate to nature.
itudo rigorose sumpta pro essentia beatitudinis dicat determi- Secondly, because although happiness rigorously taken through Secondly.
natos actus, tamen absolute pro statu, includit collectionem om- the essence of happiness expresses a determinate act, yet in that state
110 nium <151> bonorum: unde hoc modo beatitudo in communi is absolutely included the collection of all goods. Hence, in this way
nihil aliud est, quam perfectio, seu congregatio bonorum om- 110R happiness in general is nothing other than perfection or the congre-
nium: sed homo naturaliter appetit hoc appetitu innato, abun- gation of all goods. But a human being naturally desires this with
dare omnibus bonis sibi convenientibus: ergo hoc etiam modo an innate desire, [namely] that all goods agreeable to him abound.
Tertio. appetit naturaliter beatitudinem in communi. Tertio, quamvis Therefore, in this way also he naturally desires happiness in general.
115 naturalis beatitudo objectiva sit tantum una numero in partic- Thirdly, although objective natural happiness is only one in num- Thirdly.
ulari, tamen beatitudo formalis in variis actibus reperiri potest: 115R ber in particular things, nevertheless, formal happiness can be found
ergo ex hoc capite appetitus hic non limitatur ad unum actum, in various actions. Therefore, from this source, this desire is not lim-
sed tendit in ipsam rationem beatitudinis, quæ communis est ited to one action, but tends to the aspect itself of happiness, which
omnibus illis: ergo ex hoc etiam capite tendit in beatitudinem in is common to many actions. Therefore, from this source also it tends
120 communi, licet appetitus naturæ tendat in rem determinatam, to happiness in general, although a desire of nature tends to a deter-
tamen in illa includitur ratio communis, et ratione illius potis- 120R minate things, yet in that is included a common nature and by that
sime appetitur. Et hac etiam ratione recte dicitur appetitus inna- nature of it is especially desired. And by this reason it is also rightly
tus tendere in communem rationem vel beatitudinis, vel alterius said that an innate desire tends to a common nature, either of happi-
boni: nam revera naturalem appetitum inclinari ad commune ness or some other good. For in fact for a natural desire to be inclined
125 bonum nihil aliud est, quam inclinari veluti sub disjunctione ad to common good is nothing other than for it to be inclined just as un-
hunc, vel illum actum, in quo invenitur illa communis perfec- 125R der a disjunction to this or that act, in which is found that common
tio, nam hac ratione ille appetitus est quasi indifferens ad multa, perfection. For by this reason, that desire is as if indifferent to many
et erit contentus quolibet illorum dummodo in se contineat ra- and it will be content by whatever of those provided it contains in
tionem illam communem. Atque sic patet responsio ad funda- itself that common nature. And thus the response to the foundation
130 mentum Scoti, in numero quarto. of Scotus given in n. 4 is clear.

-- 4 of 4 --
