Last revision: January 5, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 4, SECT. 11
© Sydney Penner 2011
<39>2
De beatitudine in communi; an sit, at quid sit. Concerning happiness in general: whether it is and what it is.
Beatitudo hominis re ipsa idem est cum ultimo fine cum solum The happiness of a human being is the same thing as his ultimate end,
differre videantur, quod sub nomine finis indicat formalem ra- since they only seem to differ because the formal nature of a cause is
tionem causæ: sub nomine autem beatitudinis solum dicit ra- indicated by the name ‘end’ while the nature of perfect and consum-
5 tionem boni perfecti et consummati: unde Deus dicitur habere 5R mate good is expressed by the name ‘happiness’. This is why God is
beatitudinem perfectam, quamvis non habeat proprie ultimum said to have perfect happiness even though he does not properly have
finem: in homine vero quia beatitudo est res ab ipso distincta, an ultimate end. But because in the case of a human being happiness
quæ illam movet ad sui amorem, et inquisitionem propter seip- is something distinct him that moves him to love it and to search for it
sam et reliqua omnia in ipsam ordinando ut in bonum perfec- for its own sake and with all remaining things ordered to it as to a per-
10 tum, sicut Aristoteles dixit 1, Ethic., cap. 4, ideo beatitudo ha- 10R fect good (as Aristotle says in EN I, c. 4), therefore happiness has the
bet rationem finis. Atque ob hanc causam, postquam dictum nature of an end. And for this reason, after one has spoken about the
est de communi ratione et causalitate finis ultimi, oportet in- general nature and causality of the ultimate end, one ought to inquire
quirere, quid sit finis ultimus, seu quæ sit vera hominis beat- into what the ultimate end is or what true happiness for a human being
itudo: de qua tria potissimum disputantur: Quid sit? Quæ is. Three matters are especially disputed concerning this: What is it?
15 perfectiones illam consequantur? Et quomodo appetatur, vel 15R What perfections follow it? And in what way is it desired or acquired?
comparetur? Antequam vero ad hæc accedam, oportet de signi- But before I will approach these matters, I should first talk a little about
ficatione vocis, et de quæstione, an sit beatitudo, pauca præmit- the signification of the word and of the question whether there is such
tere. a thing as happiness.
SECTIO I. SECTION I.
Quæ sit communis ratio beatitudinis, et propria hujus vocis signi- What the general ratio of happiness is and what the proper signification of
ficatio. the word is.
Quorumdam
non
contemnenda
acceptio duplex
beatitudinis.
1. Hæc quæstio est prima <col. b> omnium, juxta Aris- 1. This question is the first of all those whose matter—according to Of those not
shunned,
‘happiness’ has
two senses.
5 totelem 1, Poster., cujus materia est maxime necessaria, ut 5R Aristotle in Post. I—is especially necessary in order for the disputation
fixum ac certum scopum possit habere disputatio: nam ex de- to have a fixed and certain target. For it is a defect that the scholastics
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the
1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V =
Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 4, sect. 1 2
fectu ejus, scholastici in hac re multiplicatis hujus nominis ac- in this matter turn many questions to a dispute over ways of speaking
ceptionibus, plures quæstiones revocant ad disputationem de by multiplying the senses of this name. One can see this in Scotus, IV,
modo loquendi, ut videre licet in Scoto, in 4, dist. 49, quæst. 3, dist. 49, qq. 3, 5 and 6; Durandus, qq. 4 and 6; Paludanus, q. 3; [John]
10 5 et 6, et Durando, quæst. 4 et 6, Paludano, quæst. 3, Ma- 10R Maior, qq. 1 and 5; Ockham, IV, art. 4 of the last question; and Holkot,
jore, quæst. 1 et 5, Ochamo, in 4, quæst. ult., art. 4, et Ol- q. 8, art. 2. Among these senses, other divisions about which I will
choto, q. 8, articulo 2, apud quos, omissis aliis divisionibus, de speak in sect. 3 having been set aside for the moment, the more famous
quibus dicam in sect. 3, illa est celebrior, quod beatitudo inter- sense is that ‘happiness’ sometimes is a collective name, signifying the
dum est nomen collectivum, significant aggregatum omnium aggregate of all perfections of a human being. But sometimes it signifies
15 perfectionum hominis; interdum vero significat simplicem per- 15R a single perfection, for example, a human being’s most perfect activity.
fectionem, verbi gratia, perfectissimam hominis operationem. Others reject this distinction as serving no purpose and fashioned with-
Quam distinctionem alii rejiciunt tanquam gratis, et sine fun- out foundation, because the name ‘happiness’ is univocal and so should
damento confictam, quoniam beatitudo nomen univocum est, signify some one nature. But it cannot really be rejected because it has
atque ita unam aliquam rationem significare debet. Sed revera a strong foundation both in the thing itself and in the use of the wise.
20 non potest rejici, quia et in re ipsa, et in usu sapientum habet 20R But this should be properly and agreeably explained.
magnum fundamentum; sed debet proprie et commode expli-
cari.
1. Beatitudinis
acceptio ex
sententia
Auctoris.
2. Primo ergo beatitudo significare potest statum quem- 2. First, therefore, happiness can signify a certain felicitous state,3 The 1st sense of
‘happiness’ in the
author’s view.
dam felicem, in quo habebit homo plenitudinem bonorum et in which a human being has an abundance of goods and a full com-
25 complementum suorum desideriorum, qui interdum in sacra plement of the things he desires, which in the sacred Scriptures is some-
Scriptura nomine Regni cælorum appellatur Matth. 25: Ven- times designated by the name ‘kingdom of heaven’, e.g., in Matt. 25[:34]:
ite, benedicti, accipite regnum: interdum nomine vitæ æternæ, 25R ‘Come, you who are blessed, receive the kingdom’.4 And sometimes by
ibidem: Et ibunt hi in vitam æternam: interdum nomine glo- the name ‘eternal life’, e.g., in [Matt. 25:46]: ‘And these will enter into
riæ, Et ita intrare in gloriam suam, Luc. 24. Atque hoc modo eternal life’.5 And sometimes by the name ‘glory’, e.g., in Luke 24[:26]:
30 videtur definiisse beatitudinem Boetius, dicens: Est Beatitudo ‘And thus to enter into his glory’.6
status omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus. Sic etiam intel- And Boethius seems to define happiness in this way, saying: ‘Hap-
ligi potest quod Augustinus dixit 15, de Trinit., cap. 5: Beatus 30R piness is a perfect state with an aggregation of all goods’. What Au-
est qui habet omnia quæ vult; et quod dixit, libro I de libero gustine says can also be understood in this way: ‘Happy is he who has
Arbitrio, cap. 13: Beate vivere, est bonis veris certisque gaud- everything that he wants’ (de Trin. XV, c. 5) and ‘To live happily is to
35 ere. Sic Gregorius Nyssenus, lib. de Beatitud., in princ. : Beat- rejoice in true and certain goods’ (de lib. arb., I, c. 13). Likewise, Gre-
itudo, inquit, est comprehensio quædam omnium earum rerum gory of Nyssa in the beginning of de Beatitud.: ‘Happiness’, he says, ‘is
3I will use ‘felicitous’ for ‘felix’, although it’s not an entirely, well, felicitous translation, and reserve ‘happy’ for ‘beatus’ and ‘happiness’ for ‘beatitudo’.
4Vulgate reads: ‘Tunc dicet rex his qui a dextris ejus erunt: Venite benedicti Patris mei, possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi’.
5Vulgate reads: ‘Et ibunt hi in supplicium æternum: justi autem in vitam æternam’.
6Vulgate reads: ‘Nonne hæc oportuit pati Christum, et ita intrare in gloriam suam?’
11 ult. ] om. V.
13 3 ] 2 V.
21 debet ] om. V.
29 24 ] 23 A V.
33 I ] om. V.

-- 2 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 4, sect. 1 3
quæ in homine intelliguntur, a qua nihil abest eorum, quæ per- 35R a certain comprehension of all those things which are understood in a
tinent ad bonorum desiderium, atque cupiditatem. Sic etiam human, by which none of those are absent which pertain to the desire
D. Thomas 1, 2, quæst. 5, art. 3 et 4, dicit, beatitudinem and cupidity for goods’. Likewise, St. Thomas says in [ST ] IaIIæ.5.3
40 esse perfectum, ac sufficiens bonum, omne malum excludens, et and 4 that happiness is a ‘perfect and sufficient good, excluding all bad
omne desiderium implens. Sic denique videtur loqui interdum and satisfying every desire’. Finally, it seems that sometimes Aristotle
de beatitudine Aristoteles dicens, bene vivere, et bene agere, et 40R speaks in this way concerning happiness, saying: ‘to live well and to do
felicem esse, eadem esse putant omnes 1, Ethic., cap. 4. Et ra- well and to be felicitous are thought by everyone to be the same’ (EN I,
tio adjungi potest supponendo hujusmodi statum esse possi- c. 4).
45 bilem ho- <40> mini, et ad perfectam omni ex parte felic- And a reason can be added for supposing that this sort of state is
itatem requiri: nam hic status concipitur per modum unius possible for humans and can require every part for perfect felicity. For
completi et consummati boni: ergo potest una voce signifi- 45R this state is conceived in the mode of one complete and consummate
cari. Quid ergo impedit quominus hac voce beatitudo vel fe- good. Therefore, it can be signified by one expression. What, there-
licitas significetur, cum hæc sit accommodata, et nulla alia sit fore, stands in the way so that this expression ‘happiness’ or ‘felicity’
50 ad hoc imposita. Et confirmatur, nam in homine solemus dis- does not signify, when this is suitable and no other expression has been
tinguere beatitudinem animæ et beatitudinem corporis, et sic imposed for this? And it is confirmed for we are accustomed to dis-
dicimus, Christum in via habuisse animæ beatitudinem, non 50R tinguishing between the happiness of the soul and the happiness of the
tamen corporis, et sancti dicunt animas nunc esse beatas, non body in a human, and thus we say that Christ had happiness of the soul
tamen habere beatitudinem omni ex parte completam: ergo in during his earthly life but not happiness of the body. And saintly souls
55 his omnibus locutionibus supponitur beatitudinem uno modo are said to be happy now, but nevertheless not to have complete happi-
significare hujusmodi statum omni ex parte perfectum. ness in every part. Therefore, in all these locutions it is assumed that
55R ‘happiness’ in one way signifies this sort of state perfect in every part.
2. Acceptio magis
propria.
3. Magis vero proprie juxta scholasticam consuetudinem 3. But according to scholastic custom happiness is usually more The 2nd sense is
more proper.	accipi solet beatitudo prout significat summam quamdam per- properly taken as signifying a certain highest perfection of a human be-
fectionem hominis, qua conjungitur optimo ac summo bono, ing, in which he is conjoined with his best and highest good or ultimate
60 seu fini ultimo suo, quæ alio modo dici solet perfectissima ho- end, which in another way is usually said to be a human being’s most
minis operatio, qua suum finem ultimum consequitur. Atque 60R perfect activity by which his ultimate end is acquired. And Aristotle
hoc modo frequentius videtur loqui de beatitudine Aristoteles seems to speak more frequently in this way concerning happiness in
1 et 10, Ethic., et D. Thomas 1, 2, quæst. 2, cum docet, beat- EN I and X, as well as St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.2, when he teaches that
itudinem consistere in contemplatione, vel in optima opera- happiness consists in contemplation or in the best activity. But if other
65 tione; si vero requirit alia bona ad statum beatificum, solum est goods are required for the beatific state, it is only insofar as they serve
quatenus huic optimæ operationi deserviunt, ut aliquo modo 65R this best activity so that they in some way perfect the human being in
perficiunt hominem in ordine ad illam. Atque hoc modo lo- relation to the best activity. And St. Thomas speaks more often in this
quitur de beatitudine frequentius D. Thomas in hac materia, way concerning happiness in this matter and in all of q. 2, and when
et tota quæst. 2, in 1, 2, et cum absentia beatitudinis excludit the absence of happiness excludes the remaining created goods besides
70 cætera bona creata præter Deum, et quæst. 3, artic. 1 et 4, et God, and q. 3, art. 1 and 4 and often elsewhere when he teaches that
sæpe alias cum docet beatitudinem consistere in adeptione seu 70R happiness consists in the attainment or possession of the highest good.
possessione summi boni. Item eadem ratione dicunt sæpe et Likewise, for the same reason, both the holy Fathers and the
sancti Patres et philosophi, hominem esse capacem beatitudinis philosophers often say that a human being is capable of the happiness

-- 3 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 4, sect. 1 4
secundum animam, et non secundum corpus, si enim sit sermo of the soul and not of the happiness of the body, for if the discussion
75 de collectione bonorum, hæc partim in anima, partim in cor- is about the collection of goods, these are found partly in the soul and
pore reperiuntur: tamen loquendo proprie de beatitudine in 75R partly in the body. Nevertheless, speaking properly concerning happi-
prædicta significatione pro adeptione ultimi finis, hæc in anima ness in the aforementioned signification as the attainment of the ulti-
reperitur, ut postea dicemus, et ideo sancti in solis animabus mate end, this is found in the soul, as we will say later, and therefore
dicuntur simpliciter beati, quamvis careant ex parte bonorum, the holy are called happy only in their souls, strictly speaking, how-
80 quæ ad corpus pertinent: et similiter Christus in via fuit bea- ever much they may lack the goods which pertain to the body. And,
tus propter beatitudinem animæ. Denique hac ratione dicitur 80R similarly, Christ was happy during his earthly life on account of the
solus homo proprie capax beatitudinis, ut docuit Augustinus, happiness of the soul.
lib. 83, Quæst., quæst. 5, et lib. 12, de Civit., cap. 1, nam si Finally, for this reason only a human being is properly called ca-
sit sermo de statu perfecto, et de collectione omnium perfec- pable of happiness, as Augustine taught in Quæst. lib. 83, q. 5 and de
85 tionum, quæ na- <col. b> turæ debentur, sic unaquæque res Civit. XII, c. 1. For if the discussion is about a perfect state and a col-
juxta capacitatem suæ naturæ potest dici capax suæ felicitatis, si 85R lection of all the perfections owed to a nature, each thing can be called
sit in statu perfecto juxta naturam suam; tamen quia beatitudo capable of its felicity according to the capacity of its nature, if it is in
proprie significat, et requirit conjunctionem cum ultimo fine, the perfect state according to its nature. Nevertheless, because happi-
attingendo illum aliquo modo in se per propriam operationem ness properly signifies and requires conjunction with the ultimate end
90 creaturæ capacis beatitudinis, ideo sola creatura rationalis dici- by arriving at it in some way in itself through the proper activity of a
tur capax beatitudinis simpliciter, quia illa sola est capax hujus 90R creature capable of happiness, for this reason only a rational creature is,
operationis, in qua consistit beatitudinis essentia. strictly speaking, capable of happiness because only it is capable of this
activity in which the essence of happiness consists.
Ratio declarans
hanc propriam
acceptionem.
4. Ratione denique ita potest hoc declarari, quia licet 4. This can, finally, be established by reason in this way: although A reason
establishing this
proper sense.
ad statum perfectum beatitudinis multa concurrant, tamen many things concur for this perfect state of happiness, it is, neverthe-
95 necesse est, ut inter illa aliquid sit summum, ad quod cætera 95R less, necessary that something among them is highest to which the re-
referantur, vel ex eo tanquam ex primo fonte dimanent, aut maining are referred or from which they flow just as from a first spring
in eo eminenter contineantur: quia non potest esse aggregatio or in which they are eminently contained. For there cannot be a perfect
multorum perfecta, sine aliquo ordine multorum inter se: il- aggregate of many things without some order between the many things.
lud ergo, quod est summum et perfectum in eo statu, dicitur Therefore, that which is the highest and perfect in that state is called the
100 essentia beatitudinis: cætera vero sunt veluti proprietates aut 100R essence of happiness. But the others are, as it were, properties or acci-
accidentia ejus. Vel aliter, quamvis multa bona reperiantur in dents of it. Or, to put it differently, although many goods are found
beato, non tamen per omnia attingit suum supremum finem, in a happy [life], one does not, nevertheless, attain one’s supreme end
aut illum consequitur: ergo non omnia æque pertinent ad beat- through all of them nor does it follow from all of them. Therefore, not
itudinem, neque ad rationem ultimi finis: ergo beatitudo signi- all pertain equally to happiness nor to the nature of an ultimate end.
105 ficat perfectionem ultimam ad quam cætera referuntur; merito 105R Therefore, happiness signifies the ultimate perfection to which the re-
essentia beatitudinis non dicitur consistere in tota illa collec- maining things are referred. The essence of happiness is rightly not
tione, sed in eo, quod est in illa supremum et ultimum: hoc said to consist in that entire collection, but in that which is supreme
igitur proprie significare potest hæc vox beatitudo; atque hoc and ultimate among [the members of that collection]. The expression
fere modo utemur illa in tota hac materia; statum vero beat- ‘happiness’, therefore, can properly signify this. And we will generally
110 itudinis ad tollendam æquivocationem hoc modo semper ap- 110R use it in this way in this entire discussion. But in order to avoid equiv-

-- 4 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 4, sect. 1 5
pellabimus, quamvis in eo statu possit esse latitudo, et in illo ocation we will always designate the state of happiness in this way, al-
oporteat aliqua distinctione uti, quam opportuniori loco trade- though there can be latitude in that state and one should make some
mus. distinction in it, which we will make in an opportune place.
Beatitudo partim
formalis, partim
objectiva.
5. Atque ex his sequitur primo, quod sicut supra agentes de 5. And from these things it follows, first, that just as we said above Happiness, partly
formal, partly
objective.
115 fine diximus interdum finem significare rem, quæ intenditur: 115R when talking about the end that sometimes the end signifies the thing
interdum vero consecutionem illius rei, ita in præsenti in beat- which is intended and sometimes the acquisition of that thing, so at
itudine duo possunt considerari, aliud est res, qua vel quibus present two things can be considered in happiness: one is the thing by
beatificamur, aliud est consecutio illius rei; illa vocatur objec- which or in which we are made happy and the other is the acquisition
tum beatitudinis, seu beatitudo objectiva: hæc vocatur beat- of that thing. The former is called the object of happiness or objec-
120 itudo formalis, seu per modum consecutionis: utraque vero 120R tive happiness; the latter is called formal happiness or happiness in the
constituit unam beatitudinem, quia una sine altera beatificare mode of attainment. But both together constitute one happiness, be-
non potest, sed utramque in suo genere concurrere necesse est. cause one without the other cannot make one happy, but it is necessary
Descriptio
integræ
beatitudinis.
Unde concludi potest formalis quædam, et generalis descrip- that both it their genus come together. Hence, a certain formal and A description of
integrated
happiness.
tio beatitudinis, <41> saltem quoad quid nominis, est enim general description of happiness can be composed, at least insofar as
125 consecutio ultimi, ac supremi boni, quod ab homine desiderari 125R the name is concerned: for it is the attainment of the most ultimate
potest, et in quo cætera virtute continetur, seu ad illud referun- and supreme good that can be desired by a human and in which
tur: quæ descriptio ex communi consensu omnium, qui de the remaining [goods] are virtually contained or to which they are
beatitudine loquuntur, sumitur; et sacra Scripture etiam hac referred. This description is taken from the general consensus of every-
ratione de beatitudine loquitur per modum possessionis, seu one who talks about happiness. And holy Scripture also for this reason
130 consecutionis, Matth. 25, possidete regnum: 1, ad Corinth. 4: 130R talks about happiness in the mode of possession or attainment: ‘take
Sic currite ut comprehendatis, ad Philip. 3: Sequor, si quo modo hold of the kingdom’ (Matt. 25[:34]),7 ‘Run so as to get [the prize]’
comprehendam. Et ratio esse potest, quia beatitudo dicit ter- (1 Cor. 4[i.e., 9:24]),8 and ‘I press on, if in that way I may take hold’
minum, quamdiu autem homo inquirit, non quiescit, termi- (Phil. 3).9 And the reason can be that happiness expresses a terminus.
natur autem inquisitio ad acquisitionem: ergo necesse est ut As long as a human being searches, he does not rest, but his search is
135 beatitudo in acquisitione consistat. Quod exemplo falsæ beat- 135R terminated by the attainment. Therefore, it is necessary that happiness
itudinis declarari etiam potest, nam avarus, qui beatitudinem consists in attainment. It can also be shown by the example of false
suam ponit in divitiis, non censet se beatam illas inquirendo, happiness, for the miser who places his happiness in wealth does not
aut vendendo, sed obtinendo et possidendo; et idem de sim- consider himself happy in seeking wealth or in selling, but in obtaining
ilibus. Idem ergo erit in vera beatitudine, quæ consistit in con- and possessing. And likewise for similar cases. Therefore, it will be the
140 secutione veri ac supremi boni. Sic Gregorius Nyssenus expli- 140R same in true happiness, which consists in the acquisition of the true and
cans sextam beatitudinem, Beati mundo corde. supreme good. Gregory of Nyssa explains the sixth beatitude—‘Happy
Sed inquiret aliquis, quæ sit formalis ratio hujus consecu- are the pure in heart’ ([Matt. 5:8])—in this way.
tionis. Respondetur nunc in communi solum dici posse consis- But if someone asks what the formal nature of this acquisition is, I
tere in aliqua conjunctione hominis cum illo bono, quo beatif- respond that for the moment it can generally only be said to consist in
7Vulgate: ‘Tunc dicet rex his qui a dextris ejus erunt: Venite benedicti Patris mei, possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi’.
8Vulgate: ‘Nescitis quod ii qui in stadio currunt, omnes quidem currunt, sed unus accipit bravium? Sic currite ut comprehendatis’.
9Vulgate: ‘non quod jam acceperim, aut jam perfectus sim: sequor autem, si quomodo comprehendam in quo et comprehensus sum a Christo Jesu’.
131 ut ] et V.

-- 5 of 6 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 4, sect. 1 6
145 icandus est. An vero hæc conjunctio fiat per unionem, vel op- 145R some conjunction of a human being with that good by which he is to
erationem, vel alio modo, pertinet ut ita dicam, ad materialem be made happy. But whether this conjunction happens through union
rationem beatitudinis, quæ postea est a nobis explicanda: nam or action or in some other way pertains, if I may speak this way, to the
ex formali ratione consecutionis, ut sic, illud proprie definiri material nature of happiness, which is to be explained by us later. For
potest. Itaque videtur hæc ratio in hoc consistere, quod res, seu from the formal nature of attainment as such the former can properly
150 bonum, ita possideatur ac teneatur, sicut appetitur et desider- 150R be defined. And so it seems that this nature consists in this, that the
atur; nam cum hæc consecutio sit terminus desiderii, et sati- thing or good is seized and held just as it is sought and desired (appeti-
etas ejus, tunc censetur res consecuta quando ita obtinetur si- tur et desideratur). For when this attainment is the terminus of a desire
cut desideratur, quod videre licet in falsa beatitudine, nam qui and satisfies it, then the thing is considered to have been achieved when
illam ponit in divitiis, eas assequitur per dominium et pos- it is obtained in the way that it is desired. One may see this in the case
155 sessionem; qui vero in delectatione ciborum, habebit conse- 155R of false happiness, for he who places it in wealth pursues it through
cutionem per sensum gustus et tactus, et sic de cæteris: ergo ownership and possession, but he who places it in the delight of food,
sicut in falsa beatitudine, consecutio respondet pravo appeti- will have attainment through the senses of taste and touch, and so on
tui, ita in vera beatitudine illa censetur vera consecutio quæ for the rest. Therefore, just as in false happiness attainment responds to
terminat, et apta est satiare perfectum ac rectum appetitum a depraved desire, so in true happiness that is considered a true attain-
160 veri, et summi boni; et quoniam hic appetitus est consenta- 160R ment which terminates and is apt to satisfy the perfect and right desire
neus, et proportionatus fini, seu objecto suo, ideo consecutio for the true and highest good. And because this desire is fiiting and pro-
illi respondens erit etiam proportionata tali objecto, atque adeo portionate to its end or object, the attainment corresponding to it will
talis erit, qualis res illa, quæ summum bonum postulaverit, seu also be proportionate to such an object and will be just like the thing
quatenus natura sua apta fuerit ut possideatur et <col. b> te- which the highest good demanded or insofar as its nature was apt for
165 neatur; qualis autem in particulari sit, postea dicemus. 165R possessing and holding. What it is in particular, however, we will talk
about later.

-- 6 of 6 --
