Last revision: February 5, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 2, SECT. 31
© Sydney Penner 2011
<22, col. a>2
Utrum homo operetur propter finem in actionibus, quæ a volun- Whether a human being acts for the sake of an end in actions that do not
tate non procedunt. proceed from the will.
1. Diximus hactenus de actionibus voluntatis, tam elicitis, 1. We have spoken so far about actions of the will: elicited and com-
quam imperatis, et tam liberis, quam necessariis: ut ergo si manded, free and necessary. Therefore, in order for the disputation
5 completa disputatio de actibus hominis dicendum est brevis- 5R about the acts of a human being to be complete, something should
sime de reliquis operationibus ejus, quæ a voluntate non pro- be said very briefly about the remaining acts of a human, which do
cedunt: latius enim id agimus in disp. 23, Metaphysicæ, sect. 3, not proceed from the will (for we discuss this more widely in DM
Arguitur pro
actibus intellectus
præcedentibus
voluntatem.
art. 18. Et primo potest esse difficultas de actibus intellectus, XXIII.3.18). And, first, there can be a difficulty about acts of the in- It is argued for
acts of the
intellect
preceding will.
qui præveniunt voluntatem, nam illi videntur maxime proprii tellect which come before the will, for these seem to be most properly
10 hominis, et valde perfecti: ergo ut sunt ab homine debent 10R of a human and very perfect. Therefore, as they are from a human,
habere hanc perfectionem. Quod maxime urgeri solet de vi- they ought to have this perfection. This is usually especially urged in
sione beata: nam illa est operatio, in qua est ultimus finis: ergo the case of the beatific vision. For that is the activity in which the ul-
etiam est propter finem ex D. Thoma 1, 2, quæst. 1, art. 1, timate end is. Therefore, it is also for the sake of the end, according to
Item pro actibus
vegetativæ
animæ.
ad 1. Secundo idem inquiri potest de actionibus mere nat- St. Thomas [ST IaIIæ.1.1 ad 1. Secondly, the same can be asked about Likewise for acts
of the vegetative
soul.
15 uralibus facultatis vegetativæ, seu animalis, ut sunt nutritio, 15R merely natural actions of the vegetative faculty or soul, like nutrition,
motus cordis, etc., nam si alia agentia naturalia agunt propter the motion of the heart, etc. For if other natural agents act for the sake
finem, cur non etiam homo in his actionibus, præsertim quia of an end, why not also a human being in these actions, especially since
etiam passiones involuntariæ possunt ab homine recipi propter the involuntary passions can be accepted for the sake of an end by a
finem; ergo magis actus naturalis. human? Therefore, natural acts even more.
20	Arguitur tertio
pro actibus
appetitus
animalis.
2. Tertio est major difficultas de actibus appetitus tam ex 20R 2. Thirdly, there is a greater difficulty with acts of the appetite It is argued,
thirdly, for acts of
the animal
appetite.
ratione communi hominis quam cæterorum animalium, quia coming from the general nature of a human being than with [acts] of
hic appetitus movetur ex cognitione boni; ergo ex metapho- the rest of the animals, because this appetite is moved as a result of a
rica cognitione objecti boni, in qua diximus, disp. 1, consistere cognition of good. Therefore, as a result of metaphorical cognition of
causalitatem finis: ergo in hoc appetitu præcise, et vi sua habet the good object, in which the causality of the end consists, as we said
25 locum actio propter finem, præsertim cum D. Thoma sæpe di- 25R in disp. 1. Therefore, with regards to this appetite, considered apart
cat, bruta apprehendere rationem boni, utilis, et ab ea moveri, from other things, and its strength, action has a place for the sake of
ut patet ex 1 p., quæst. 28 [sic], art. 4, ubi autem est bonum the end, especially since St. Thomas often says that brute animals ap-
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not
always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 2, sec. 3 2
Et speciatim de
hominis appetitu.
utile, est ordinatio in finem. Deinde ex speciali ratione homi- prehend the nature of useful good and are moved by it, as is clear from
nis, quia in eo appetitus non movetur tantum ab æstimativa, [ST Ia.78.4, where, moreover, the useful good is ordained to the end.
30 sed etiam a cogitativa, quæ juxta multorum opinionem discur- 30R Next, from the special nature of a human being, because in him the And especially
for the appetite
of a human.
rere potest circa <col. b> particularia: ergo poterit etiam con- appetite is moved not only by the estimative but also by the cogitative
ferre medium cum fine. Quin potius aliqui existimant, quando [faculty], which according to the opinions of many can think through
intellectus confert, et cognoscit proportionem medii cum fine, things from one thing to another concerning particulars. Therefore,
si objectum sit sensibile et proportionatum, necessarium esse it will also be able to associate a means with an end. In contrast, oth-
35 ut cogitatio comitetur intellectum et similem collationem fa- 35R ers think that when the intellect associates and cognizes the relation of
ciat: ergo appetitus sequens hanc potentiam et formaliter, et ex the means to the end, if the object is sensible and proportionate, it is
propria ordinatione appetit unum propter aliud, et præsertim necessary that a cogitation attend the intellect and make a similar asso-
quia ex motione rationis sæpe appetitus fertur in id, quod vide- ciation. Therefore, the appetite following this power both formally and
tur sensui repugnare: propter quod D. Thomas 1, 2, quæst. 30, from a proper ordiation desires one thing for the sake of another, and
40 art. 3, ad 3, dixit in nostro appetitu esse concupiscentiam, quæ 40R especially because the appetite is often brought by a motion of reason
est cum ratione, et 1 p., q. 81, art. 3, ad. 2, dicit in homine to that which seems repugnant to the sense. For this reason St. Thomas
moveri appetitum a ratione universali. says in [ST IaIIæ.30.3 ad 3 that there is rational concupiscence in our
appetite and says in [ST ] Ia.81.3 ad 2 that appetite in a human being is
moved by universal reason.
Notationes pro
decisione.
Prima.
3. Advertendum est breviter, aliud esse actum procedere a 45R 3. It should be noted briefly that something else is an act proceed- Notes towards a
decision.
First.
voluntate; aliud esse volitum a voluntate: nam primum dicit ing from the will, something else is wished by the will. For the first ex-
45 rationem effectus et causæ, secundum vero tantum dicit ra- presses the nature of an effect and cause, but the second only expresses
Secunda. tionem objecti et actus, qui circa illud fertur. Atque simili ra- the nature of an object and act, which is made for the sake of the for-
tione illud est actum fieri propter finem, aliud vero extrinsece mer. And for a similar reason the former is an act that happens for the Second.
ordinari in finem aliquo modo: nam primum requirit quod 50R sake of an end, but the other is extrinsically ordered to the end in some
ipsa mutatio sit a voluntate ut a causa operante propter finem: way. For the first requires that the change itself is from the will as from
50 secundum vero solum requirit: ut actus ametur, seu sit voli- a cause acting for the sake of an end. But the second only requires that
tus propter aliquem finem, licet ab ipso amante non fiat ipsa the act is loved or is willed for the sake of some end, although from
actio propter talem finem ex propria et intrinseca ordinatione the one loving himself the action itself does not happen for the sake of
Tertia. ejus. Supponimus enim ultimo, sermonem esse de operatione 55R such an end from its proper and intrinsic ordering. For we suppose, Third.
propter finem formaliter ac proprie ex ordinatione ipsius op- lastly, that the discussion is about acting for the same of end formally
55 erantis proxime, et non tantum ex extrinseca ordinatione ip- and properly from a proximate ordering of the one acting himself and
sius auctoris naturæ, prout naturalia agentia operantur propter not only from an extrinsic ordering by the author of nature, as natural
finem. agents act for the sake of an end.
Assertio
bipartita.
4. Dicendum est ergo, actus seu actiones omnes quæ nullo 60R 4. It should be said, therefore, that all acts or actions which in no A two-part
assertion.	modo cadunt sub humanam voluntatem, esse posse propter way fall under human will can be for the sake of an end passively or
60 finem passive, seu extrinsece, eo videlicet modo, quo actiones extrinsically, namely, in that way in which the actions of natural agents
naturalium agentium sunt propter finem, non tamen active et are for the sake of an end, but not actively and intrinsically, that is, from
intrinsece, id est, ex propria ipsius hominis ordinatione et in- a proper ordering intention of the human being himself. The first part The first part is
urged.	Suadetur prior
pars.
tentione. Prior pars per se clara est, quia non est in hac parte 65R is clear per se, because a human being is in no worse of a condition with

-- 2 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 2, sec. 3 3
homo deterioris conditionis, quam alia naturalia agentia; nam respect to this than other natural agents. For in these actions he also acts
65 in his actibus etiam operatur ex impetu naturæ, et tendit in from the impetus of nature and tends to the target having been destined
scopum ab auctore naturæ destinatum; et hoc probant rationes by the author of nature. And the arguments for doubting posited in
Suadetur
posterior.
dubitandi in num. 5, positæ, ut dicemus. Posterior autem pars n. 5 show this, as we will say. The latter part, moreover, is easily shown The latter part is
urged.	facile probatur ex his dictis, quia motio finis propria est vol- 70R from these statements, because the motion of an end is properly of the
untatis, cujus finis est objectum, unde tendere in finem per will, of which the end is the object. Hence, it tends to the end through a
70 proprium actum, atque alia ordinare in finem, ad voluntatem proper act and orders others to the end as it looks to the will. Therefore,
spectat: ergo, secluso omni actu vo- <23> luntatis, non potest excluding all acts of the will, there cannot be an act for the sake of an
esse actus propter finem ex propria, et intrinseca ordinatione end from a proper and intrinsic ordering of the one acting.
operantis. Ex quo fit, si actus sit a voluntate ut a causa eli- 75R From which it happens that if the act is from the will as from an
ciente, vel operante, tunc posse fieri, et esse proprie propter eliciting or acting cause, then it can happen and be properly for the sake
75 finem; sicut dictum est in præcedentibus. Si autem non sit a of an end, just as was said in the preceding [passages]. But if it is not
voluntate, ut a causa, sit tamen voluntarius saltem objective, from the will as from a cause, yet is at leat objectively voluntary, then
tunc non fiet proprie propter finem, quia non fit ex motione it will not properly happen for the sake of an end, because it does not
voluntatis; potest tamen ordinari ad aliquem finem, quia hoc 80R happen from a motion of the will. Nevertheless, it can be ordered to
ipso quod voluntas vult aliquem actum, propter aliquem finem some end, because by the fact that the will wishes some act it wishes it
80 illum vult: et hoc est ordinare illum in aliquem finem, quæ or- for the sake of some end and this is to order that to some end. Although
dinatio licet physice nihil ponat in ipso actu, potest tamen ad this ordination physically places nothing in that act, nevertheless it can
moralem valorem conferre: sic enim passiones, quæ non fiunt confer moral value. For thus the passions, which are not made by the
a voluntate, si per voluntatem acceptentur, et ad satisfacien- 85R will, if they are accepted through the will and are directed to satisfaction
dum pro peccatis referantur, possunt ad hunc effectum habere for sins, can hold some moral value for this effect.
85 aliquem moralem valorem.
Ad argum. de
actibus intellectus
in num. 1.
5. Ex his facilis est responsio ad rationes dubitandi in prin- 5. From these things a response to the arguments posited in the To the argument
about acts of the
intellect in n. 1.
cipio positas. Ad primam enim respondetur, visionem Dei (et beginning is easy. For to the first is responded that the vision of God
idem est de omni actu naturali intellectus, ut antecedit om- (and the same for all natural acts of the intellect as the precede every
nem actum voluntatis), non esse propter finem ut est ab ipso 90R act of the will) is not for the sake of an end as it is from the name
90 nomine: quia solum est quasi ex impetu naturæ, unde potius itself, because it is only as if from the impetus of nature. Hence it is
est finis, quam propter finem, licet ut est affectio sui objecti more an end that for the sake of an end, although insofar as it is an
haberet illum pro fine, prout ex naturali sua inclinatione; at affection for its object, it may have that for the end as from its natural
vero eo modo, quo illa actio potest esse voluntaria, potest or- inclination. But on the other had, by that way by which that action
dinari in finem, sic enim potest beatus velle videre Deum in 95R can be voluntary, it can be ordered to an end. For in that way the
95 gloriam ipsius Dei; vel etiam in suum commodum, ut illa vi- blessed person can wish to see God in the glory of God himself or also
sione consequatur suum summum bonum. according to his advantage, as that vision attends his highest good.
Ad argum. de
actibus animæ
vegetat. ibid.
Ad secundum jam est responsum, quomodo inferiores nat- To the second argument was already responded how lower natural To the argument
about acts of the
vegetative soul in
n. 1.
urales actiones, vel passiones sint propter finem, vel possint actions or passions are for the sake of an end or how in some way they
aliquo modo ordinari in finem. 100R are ordered to an end.
100	Ad 3. de actibus
appetitus in
num. 2.
6. Ad tertium, quod ad bruta attinet, dicendum est, in- 6. To the third [argument] which concerns brute animals it should To the third
argument
concerning acts
of the appetite in
n. 2.
veniri in illis quamdam imperfectam participationem causali- be said that there is found in these a certain imperfect participation in

-- 3 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 2, sec. 3 4
tatis finis, quatenus ab objecte apprehenso excitantur, ut per the causality of the end, to the extent that they are excited by the object
appetitum elicitum in illum tendant, et illum prosequantur, aut having been apprehended, so that they tend to it through an elicited
ab illo fugiant: nam cum causalitas finis consistat in motione 105R desire and either pursue it or flee from it. For since the causality of the
105 voluntatis, quæ est appetitus elicitivus, quantum participant end consists in a motion of the will, which is the elicitive appetite, in-
de hoc appetitu et motione, tantum necesse est participent de sofar as they participate in this appetite and motion, it is also necessary
causalitate finis. Nihilominus, absolute loquendo, non operan- that they participate in the causality of the end.
tur formaliter propter finem, quia solum moventur a fine ma- Nevertheless, absolutely speaking, they do not formally act for the
terialiter, ut docet D. Thomas, 1, 2, quæst. 1, art. 2, et melius 110R sake of an end, because they are only moved by the material end, as
110 quæst. 6, <col. b> art. 2, et potest in hunc modum explicari. St.Thomas teaches in [ST ] IaIIæ.1.2 and better in 6.2. And it can be
Nam quoad actiones, quæ versantur circa media, quibus ac- explained in this way. For regarding actions which turn concerning the
quiritur finis, bruta non agnoscunt proportionem mediorum means by which the end is acquired, brute animals do not recognize the
cum fine, nec unum cum alio conferre possunt, atque adeo hoc relation of means to an end nor can they compare one with another and
modo operantur propter finem; quoad eas vero actiones, quæ 115R therefore they act for the sake of an end in this way. But regarding those
115 versantur circa finem, non cognoscunt in ipso fine propriam actions which turn concerning the end, they do not cognize in the end
convenientiam sub qua movet, et propter quam est per se ap- itself a proper agreeability under which it moves and for the sake of
petibilis, quia hoc etiam requirit collationem talis objecti cum which it is desirable per se, because this also requires a comparison of
natura, et perfectam cognitionem illius; et ita quamvis materi- such an object with nature and its perfect cognition. And so although
aliter tendant in rem sibi propositam, tamen non proprie op- 120R they tend materially to the thing having been placed before them, nev-
120 erantur circa illam propter finem. Unde quando D. Thomas ertheless, they do not properly act concerning it for the sake of an end.
significat bruta apprehendere utilitatem, vel convenientiam, Hence, when St. Thomas indicates that brute animals apprehend utility
aut disconvenientiam cum propria natura, non est intelligen- or agreeability or disagreeability with proper nature, it should not be
dus, quia formaliter cognoscatur a brutis, sed tantum materi- understood as being formally cognized by brute animals but only ma-
aliter ex instinctu naturæ, quia videlicet apprehenso objecto 125R terially by an instinct of nature, because, namely, by the object having
125 statim ex instinctu naturæ apprehendant esse prosequendum been apprehended they apprehend immediately by an instinct of nature
vel fugiendum. Et hoc significat D. Thomas, loco citato, cum that it is to be pursued or avoided. And St. Thomas indicates this in the
ait: Apprehendere has intentiones naturæ quodam instinctu. Cu- cited place when he says: ‘to apprehend these intentions of nature by a
jus signum est, quia eodem impetu, et modo tendunt in id, certain instinct’.3 It is a sign of this that by the same impetus and in the
quod est medium, et in id, quod est finis, quia utrumque ap- 130R same way they tend to that which is the means as to that which is the
130 prehendunt ut prosequendum, et in neutro apprehendunt dis- end, because they apprehend both as something to be pursued and they
tincte rationem, propter quam prosequendum sit, qua de re apprehend in neither a distinct reason for the sake of which it should
latius in disputatione 23, Metaphysicæ, sect. 10. be pursued. We say more about this in DM XXIII.10.
Ad aliud de
speciali appetitu
hominis, in
eod. num. 2.
7. Ad aliam partem de appetitu hominis respondetur, 7. To the other part about the appetite of a human being, I respond To the other part
about a special
appetite of a
human being in
the same n. 2.
longam esse disputationem quid possit cogitativa hominis cog- 135R that it would be a long disputation about what a the cogitative [faculty]
135 noscere, et operari, quæ non est hoc loco tractanda. Ego vero of a human being can cognize and do. It should not be discussed in
probabilius existimo non posse hanc potentiam tam proprie this place. But I do consider it more probable that this power cannot
3Ia.78.4 co.? It reads: ‘Sed quantum ad intentiones praedictas, differentia est, nam alia animalia percipiunt huiusmodi intentiones solum naturali quodam instinctu, homo
autem etiam per quandam collationem’.

-- 4 of 5 --

Suárez, De fine hominis disp. 2, sec. 3 5
discurrere, nec etiam componere, aut dividere: et multo cer- properly go from one thing to another in thought in such a way, nor
tius est non posse res universales cognoscere. Certum item est, even compose and divide. And it is much more certain that it cannot
appetitum sensitivum hominis non posse immediate moveri a 140R cognize universal things. It is likewise certain that the sensitive appetite
140 ratione, sed solum mediante cogitativa, seu imaginatione par- of a human being cannot immediately be moved by reason, but only by
ticulari, ut D. Thomas explicuit, loco citato: et ideo etiam means of the cogitative [faculty] or a particular image, as St. Thomas
censeo hunc appetitum per se sumptum, et quatenus se movet, explained in the cited place. And therefore I also think that this appetite
non vero ut movetur a voluntate, non posse proprie operari considered per se and to the extent that it moves itself (but not as it is
propter finem, quia sensus non potest conferre inter media, 145R moved by the will) cannot properly act for the sake of an end, because
145 quæ posset hic appetitus eligere, et ita aliquam propriam liber- sense cannot compare the means which this appetite can elect and so
tatem habere, præsertim circa objecta posita ut æqualia, quod it has some proper freedom, particularly concerning objects presented
falsum est, ut infra suo loco latius dicemus. Solum ergo su- as equal, which is false, as we will discuss more widely in its place.4
perat hic appetitus appetitum brutorum, quia potest interdum Therefore, only this appetite surpasses the appetite of brute animals,
moveri ex motione appetitus superioris, et ideo non tan- <24> 150R because it can sometimes be moved by the motion of a superior appetite
150 tum movetur instinctu naturæ, sed aliquo etiam modo ex direc- and therefore is not moved only by the instinct of nature, but also in
tione rationis, in qua magis se habet ut motus, quam se moveat, some way by the direction of reason, in which case it holds itself more
et ideo sub hac ratione non dicitur proprie operari propter as one moved than as moving itself. And therefore under this reason
finem ex præcisa virtute sua, sed præcedente aliqua ratione vol- it cannot properly act for the sake of an end by its power apart from
untatis. 155R others but from some preceding reason of the will.
4Which part does Suárez take to be false?

-- 5 of 5 --
