Last revision: December 30, 2010	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 3, SECT. 31
© Sydney Penner 2010
<30, col. b>2
Utrum possit homo simul intendere duos ultimos fines simpliciter Whether someone can at the same time intend two unqualifiedly and posi-
et positive, et propter illos operari? tively ultimate ends and act for the sake of them.
Hic finis
dupliciter
consideratur.
1. Finis ultimus simpliciter, ut supra dixi, et constat ex Aris- 1. An unqualifiedly ultimate end, as I said above and as is clear from This end is
considered in two
ways.
totele 1, Ethicorum, c. 7 et 8, est finis perfectus, et bonum suffi- Aristotle, [Nichomachean] Ethics, book 1, c. 7 and 8, is a perfect end
5 ciens, atque adeo maxime necessarium intendenti talem finem. 5R and sufficient good, and to that extent is very much necessary to the
Unde dupliciter apprehendi potest: primo sub ratione com- one intending such an end. Hence, it can be apprehended in two ways.
muni sufficientis boni, etc., non constituendo illum in una vel First, under the general concept of sufficient good, etc., not as estab-
alia re determinate, et hic vocari solet finis ultimus formaliter, lishing that in one or another determinate thing, and this is custom-
in quo non habet locum præsens quæstio, quia, cum concip- arily called an ultimate end formally. With respect to it, the present
10 iatur abstracte et confuse, clarum est non posse concipi nisi per 10R question does not have a place, because, although it may be conceived
modum unius: nam qui appetit esse beatus absolute et præcise, abstractly and confusedly, it is clear that a [formally ultimate end] can-
non potest in ipsa beatitudine varietatem, et multitudinem ex- not be conceived except in the manner of one. For whoever desires to
cogitare, donec de re cogitet, qua beatificandus est. Secundo be happy absolutely and precisely cannot think of variety and multi-
igitur modo concipi potest ultimus finis ut constitutus in re ali- plicity in the happiness itself, as long as he thinks of the thing by which
15 qua, aut rerum collectione, qui dicitur finis ultimus realis, seu 15R he will be made happy. In the second way, therefore, the ultimate end
materialis: et de hoc est quæstio, an necessario sit unus tantum: can be conceived as constituted in some thing or collection of things,
agimus autem de fine intento ex formali, aut virtuali hominis which is called a real or material ultimate end. And the question is con-
intentione, quia de connaturali fine ultimo, ad quem homo cerning this, whether it is necessarily one as such. We, moreover, deal
tendit impetu naturæ, seu ordinatione divina, non est dubium with the end intended by a formal or virtual human intention, because
20 quin sit unus, ut latius infra cum agemus de beatudine, et de 20R concerning the connatural ultimate end to which a human tends by a
hoc fine procedunt duæ rationes ultimæ D. Thomæ, prima se- natural impetus or divine ordering it is not doubted but that it is one,
cundæ, quæst. 1, art. 5, quæ possunt etiam accommodari ad as [we discuss] more extensively below when we deal with happiness,
finem ultimum formalem: de quibus dicemus plura, sect. ul- and concerning this end two ultimate reasons appear in St. Thomas,
tim. hujus disputationis. [ST ] IaIIae.1.5, which can also be adapted to an ultimate formal end,
25R concerning which we say more in the last section of this disputation.
25	1. Arg. pro
affirm. parte.
2. Atque hinc oritur ratio dubitandi in hac quæstione, quia 2. And from here arises a reason for doubting in this question, The 1st arg. for
the affirmative
part.	1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the
1628 edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V =
Vivès edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 2
intentio hominis non tantum fertur ad verum finem, sed ad fal- because the intention of a human is not only brought to the true end
sum etiam et apparentem: ergo quamvis in re ipsa non possint but also to a false and apparent [end]. Therefore, although there can-
esse duo ultimi fines veri, possunt ab homine falso apprehendi, not be two true ultimate ends in the thing itself, they can be falsely
et existimari, sicut existimantur duo Dei, aut duo prima prin- 30R apprehended and thought by a human, just as two Gods are thought or
30 cipia: ergo eadem ratione possunt appeti, et intendi duo fines two first principles. Therefore, for the same reason two unqualifiedly
Secundum. ultimi simpliciter. Secundo, ut homo dicatur intendere duos ultimate ends can be desired and intended. Secondly, in order to say The second.
fines, satis est ut saltem successive habeat hujusmodi duas in- that a human being intends two ends, it is enough that he at least suc-
tentiones, dummodo virtualiter utramque retineat, quamvis cessively have two intentions of this sort, provided that he retain each
non actualiter. Jam enim supra diximus nos hic non agere de 35R virtually although not actually. For we already said above that we are
35 simultate <31> metaphysica, sed morali, vel virtuali; potest not dealing with metaphysical simultaneity, but moral or virtual [si-
autem homo nunc intendere unum ultimum finem, verbi gra- multaneity]. However, a human can now intend one ultimate end, for
tia, voluptatem et paulo post alium, verbi gratia, honorem, non example, pleasure, and then a little later another, for example, honour,
retractando priorem intentionem; quæ est enim repugnantia in while not retracting the first intention. For what is repugnant in this?
hoc? nam illæ duæ res, neque in esse rei inter se pugnant, neque 40R For these two things oppose each other neither in being the thing nor
40 in esse finis, quia utraque potest per se appeti ultimate in illa in being the end, because each can be desired per se ultimately in that
sistendo, et ad eam referendo omnia, quæ necessaria fuerint, in setting up and direct everything which is necessary to it (in which the
Tertium. quo videtur ratio ultimi finis consistere. Tertio est vulgaris dif- nature of an ultimate end seems to consist). The third is a common dif- The third.
ficultas, nam qui peccat mortaliter, constituit finem ultimum ficulty, for whoever sins mortally sets up an unqualifiedly ultimate end
simpliciter in creatura, sed potest quis simul peccare mortaliter 45R in a created thing, but anyone can sin mortally at the same time with
45 diversis actibus, et circa diversas creaturas; ergo potest simul different acts and on account of different created things. Therefore, he
plures creaturas dirigere ut ultimos fines. can direct [himself] to multiple created things as ultimate ends.
Notationes pro
decisione.
3. Advertendum est, res, in quibus ultimi fines constitu- 3. It should be noticed that the things in which ultimate ends are Notes towards a
decision.	untur duobus modis intelligi posse esse distinctas, primo for- constituted can be understood to be distinct in two ways. First, for-
maliter, et quasi specifice in ratione boni, seu convenientiæ, 50R mally, and, as it were, specifically in the ratio of good or agreeability
50 propter quam appetuntur: quomodo distinguuntur, verbi gra- for the sake of which they are desired. Pleasure, honour, and similar
tia, voluptas, honor, et similia. Secundo potest distingui tan- things, for example, are distinguished in this way. In the second [way],
tum materialiter et numerice, ut si quis, verbi gratia, appetat it can be distinguished only materially and numerically, as if someone,
divitias in tanta quantitate, nihil curans quod sit in his, vel illis for example, desires wealth in such a quantity, not caring at all what is
numero pecuniis. Rursus, plures fines ultimi intelligi possunt 55R in this or that amount of money. On the other hand, multiple ultimate
55 appeti, vel copulative appetendo habere utrumque simul, verbi ends can be understood to be desired, either in being desired conjunc-
gratia, voluptatem et honorem, vel tantum disjunctive, ut si tively to have each at the same time, for example, pleasure and honour,
quis appetat, vel voluptatem, vel honorem, et alterutrum con- or only disjunctively, as if someone desires either pleasure or honour
secutus, contentus esse velit. and, one having followed another, he wishes to be content.
1. Assertio. 4. Dicendum primo, fieri non potest ut aliquis copulative 60R 4. It should be said first that it cannot happen that someone con- The 1st assertion.
60 amet, et intendat duos fines ultimo totales et integros: unde si junctively loves and intends two complete and integrated ultimate ends.
contingat amare plures res, seu plura bona, in eis, aliquo modo Hence, if he happens to love more than one thing or more than one
ultimate sistendo, non appetit illa ut fines ultimos totales, sed good, in some way ultimately stopping in them, he does not desire them
partiales; integrum autem ultimum finem constituit in collec- as complete ultimate ends, but as partial. Moreover, the integrated ul-

-- 2 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 3
Demonstratur. tione, seu aggregato earum. Hæc est sententia D. Thomæ 1, 2, 65R timate end is constituted by a collection or aggregate of them. This is
65 quæst. 1, artic. 5, et prima ratio ejus est demonstratio, quia finis the view of St. Thomas in [ST ] IaIIæ.1.5. The first argument for it is It is
demonstrated.	ultimus integer, et totalis est ille, quem homo appetit ut com- the demonstration: because the integrated and complete ultimate end
plementum suorum desideriorum, atque adeo ut bonum sibi is that which a human being desires as something that fulfills his desires
sufficiens et aliis præferendum, ac maxime necessarium; sed, and therefore as a good sufficient to him and preferred to all others and
si homo simul appetat duo bona, impossibile est ut utrumque 70R maximally necessary. But, if a human being desires at the same time
70 existimet esse tale, quale descripsimus debere ultimum finem, two goods, it is impossible for either to be thought such as what we
quia si unum existimatur sufficiens, alterum non potest rep- described the ultimate end as needing to be, because if one is thought
utari necessarium, quia sufficiens est quod non indiget alio, sufficient, then the other one cannot be thought necessary, because to
vel e contrario, si utrumque existimatur necessarium, in neu- be sufficient is to not need something else. Or the other way around, if
tro quiescet appetitus: ergo neutrum erit integer finis ultimus. 75R both are thought necessary, the appetite will rest in neither. Therefore,
75 <col. b> neither will be the integrated ultimate end.
Instantia
bipartita.
5. Dices, unde constat totum illud esse de ratione ultimi fi- 5. You may say: Is it clear from this that that whole is of the na- A twofold
objection.	nis, vel saltem cur non poterit homo hoc ignorare, et ita ex ture of an ultimate end or at least why it will not be able to be the case
ignorantia saltem, appetere plures ultimos fines? Responde- that a human being ignore this and thus from ignorance at least desire
tur ad priorem partem, id constare ex ipsa vocis impositione, 80R more than one ultimate end? To the first part I respond that it is clear
80 et ex communi hominum sapientum usu, qui hoc intelligunt from the imposed words themselves and from the common use of wise
per ultimum finem. Item, quia in hoc distinguitur finis ul- men who understand this through an ultimate end. Likewise, because
timus et totalis a partiali, seu particulari fine. Ultimo denique in this is distinguished an ultimate and complete end from a partial or
ex re ipsa, quia constat, posse hominem intendere aliquid in particular end. Lastly, finally, from the thing itself, because it is clear
quo plene quiescat, et ad quod dirigat se, et omnia sua quan- 85R that a human being can intend something in which he fully rests and
85 tum est ex modo appetendi, et intendendi talem finem: hinc direct himself and everything of his to it by a mode of desiring and in-
Satis fit secundæ. ergo appellamus ultimum finem simpliciter. Unde ad alteram tending such an end. This, therefore, we call an unqualifiedly ultimate
partem respondetur, quamvis possit homo speculative igno- end. Hence, to the second part I respond that although a human be- He satisfies the
second part.	rare quid significet ultimus finis simpliciter, et ideo posse ex- ing can speculatively ignore an unqualifiedly ultimate end signifies and
istimare se amare plura ut ultimos fines, tamen revera et prac- 90R therefore can think himself to love more than one thing as an ultimate
90 tice, atque in exercitio non intendere illos, ut totales fines, sed end, yet in reality and practically and in exercise he does not intend
ut partiales, quandoquidem ita appetit, ut non sit contentus them as complete ends but as partial [ends], seeing that he desires them
altero, sed utroque aggregate. Atque hinc obiter constat non in such a way that he is not content with one of them but [only] with
esse necessarium ut homo constituat hunc ultimum finem in the aggregate of both. And from this, by the way, it is clear that it is not
una re, seu in uno bono, potest enim plurium collectionem ap- 95R necessary that a human being constitute this ultimate end in one thing
95 petere ut ultimum terminum suorum desideriorum: sic enim or in one good, for he can desire a collection of multiple [goods] as
philosophi multi posuerunt beatitudinem vel in collectione the ultimate terminus of his desires. For many philosophers in this way
bonorum temporalium, vel in eis simul cum virtute: neque placed happiness either in a collection of temporal goods or in those
in hoc est ulla repugnantia ex modo appetendi, vel ex ratione along with virtue. Nor is there any repugnance in this in the way of
finis ultimi, ut ex dictis constat. 100R desiring or from the nature of an ultimate end, as is clear from what
has been said.
100	2. Assertio. 6. Dicendum secundo, neque etiam disjunctive potest 6. It should be said, secondly, that a human being also cannot in- The 2nd
assertion.

-- 3 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 4
homo intendere plura bona distincta, et formaliter diversa, in- tend more than one distinct and formally diverse good disjunctively
tendendo ea tanquam ultimum finem simpliciter, et totalem. in intending them as an unqualifiedly ultimate and complete end. Con-
Suadetur primo. De hac re nihil locutus est D. Thomas: probari ergo potest 105R cerning this matter, St. Thomas has not said anything. It can, therefore, It is persuaded,
firstly.	duobus modis, primo, quia intentio hæc objecti disjuncti quan- be proven in two ways. First, because the intention of this disjunctive
105 do objecta, seu bona, quæ in disjunctione ponuntur, sunt for- object when the objects or goods which are placed in disjunction are
maliter diversa, est inefficax respectu singulorum, et insuffi- formally diverse is ineffective with respect to a single one of them and
ciens ut moveat ad opus, et ad electionem faciendam: ergo insufficient to move to an action and to making a choice. Therefore,
non potest hæc esse sufficiens intentio ultimi finis. Antecedens 110R this cannot be a sufficient intention of an ultimate end. The antecedent
declaratur primo, quia neutrum illorum bonorum absolute is shown first, because neither of those goods is intended absolutely,
110 intenditur, sed quasi sub conditione, vel in defectu alterius. but only as if under a condition or in the absence of the other. Next,
Deinde, quia cum bona sint formaliter diversa, licet fort- because when the goods are formally diverse, although perhaps one
asse unum, vel alterum medium possit ad utrumque conferre or another means can directed to both on account of some agreeabil-
propter aliquam convenientiam, quam inter se habere possunt: 115R ity which can hold between them, nevertheless absolutely and strictly
tamen absolute et simpliciter indigent diversis mediis et elec- speaking they require diverse means and choices. Therefore, that inten-
115 tionibus: ergo illa intentio non est sufficiens ad <32> elec- tion is not sufficient for making the choices as long as it is determined
tiones faciendas, donec ad aliquod ex illis bonis determine- to something by those goods. Therefore, as long as it is under a dis-
tur: ergo quamdiu est sub disjunctione, neutrum illorum junction, it [i.e., the intention,] respects neither of those goods as an
Secundo. bonorum respicit ut ultimum finem simpliciter. Secunda ra- 120R unqualifiedly ultimate end. The second argument is because through Secondly.
tio est, quia per talem intentionem, seu amorem, non potest such an intention or love one cannot desire either of those goods as
120 utrumque illorum bonorum appeti ut necessarium vel suffi- necessary or sufficient for the one desiring. Therefore, neither is loved
ciens appetenti: ergo neutrum amatur per modum ultimi fi- in the way an ultimate end is loved. The antecedent is clear because
nis. Antecedens patet, quia quodlibet illorum bonorum am- neither of those goods is loved unqualifiedly but only in the absence of
atur non simpliciter, sed in defectu alterius: ergo neutrum per 125R the other. Therefore, neither is thought absolutely necessary through
se existimatur necessarium absolute, sed ad summum sub con- itself but at most under the condition ‘if the other one is absent’. On
125 ditione, si aliud desit. Rursus, cum utrumque aliquo modo the other hand, when each of them is desired in some way, each of them
appetatur, utrumque censetur bonum appetentis, et cum sint is thought good for the one desiring and, when the goods are formally
bona formaliter diversa unum non confert ad bonitatem al- diverse, one does not add to the goodness of the other nor the other
terius, neque e contrario: ergo fieri non potest ut aliquod eo- 130R way around. Therefore, it cannot happen that one of them is desired as
rum appetatur tanquam per se sufficiens ad satiandum hominis in itself sufficient for satisfying the desire of the human. Therefore, in
130 appetitum: ergo revera neutrum amatur ut ultimus finis. reality neither is loved as an ultimate end.
3. Assertio. 7. Dicendum tertio, si bonum, quod amatur per modum 7. It should be said, thirdly, that if the good which is loved in the The 3rd
assertion.	ultimi finis, sit unum formaliter, seu ejusdem rationis, nullum way an ultimate end is loved is formally one or of the same nature, then
est inconveniens, quod sub disjunctione appetatur ut obtinen- 135R there is nothing disagreeable about it being desired under a disjunction
dum in hac, vel illa re numero diversa. Exempla sunt facilia: as obtaining in this or that thing diverse in number. Examples are eas-
135 si quis, verbi gratia, canonicatum appetat, et in hoc constit- ily come by: if someone, for example, desires the office of canon, and
uat suum finem ultimum, bene potest sub disjunctione inten- his ultimate end is constituted in this, he may well under a disjunction
Eius ratio. dere hunc, vel illum, quicumque ille sit. Ratio est, quia tunc intend this or that one, whichever that may be. The reason is because Its reason.
finis est unus formaliter, et illa distinctio numerica rerum nat- 140R then the end is one formally and that numerical distinction of natural

-- 4 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 5
uralium nihil refert vel ad mutandam intentionem, vel ad sa- things refers nothing either to changing intention or to satisfying the
140 tiandum hominis appetitum. Quod explicatur illa duplici ra- human appetite. This is explained by the two reasons given in the pre-
tione facta in præcedenti assertione contrario modo inducta: ceding assertion brought in the opposite mode. First, certainly, because
primo quidem, quia illa intentio sufficit ad adhibenda media, that intention suffices for applying the means and making the choices
et electiones faciendas usque ad assecutionem ipsius finis: quod 145R all the way to the comprehension of the end itself. If it is sometimes
si interdum necesse est adhibere aliquod speciale medium ad necessary that some particular means be applied in pursuing that end
145 consequendum illum finem potius in una re quam in alia, illud more in one thing rather than another, that is rare and per accidens and
est raro et per accidens, et tunc jam determinabitur intentio ad then in that case the intention will be determined to that thing more
rem illam potius quam ad aliam: non quia habeat aliam ratio- than to the other, not because it has another aspect of good nor be-
nem boni, nec quia censeatur sufficientior ad saturandum ap- 150R cause it is thought more sufficient for sating the appetite, but because
petitum, sed quia accidit ut fortasse hic et nunc facilius acquiri it happens that perhaps it can more easily be acquired here and now
150 possit, quam alia. Secundo, quia cum illis in rebus sit eadem ra- than another. Second, because when there is the same aspect of good
tio boni, quæ licet per se sufficit ad satiandum appetitum, qui for these in the things, which, granted, in itself suffices for satisfying
non quærit nisi tale ac tantum bonum, et in illo ponit finem the appetite, he does not strive for except if it is such and only such a
suum. 155R good and in that he places his end.
Obiectio contra
præced. assert.
8. Sed objici potest, nam ille, qui sub dis- <col. b> junc- 8. But one can object, for the person who under a disjunction de- An objection
against the
preceding
assertion.
155 tione ita appetit duas res, revera utramque appetit: ergo non sires two things in this way, really desires both of them. Therefore, he
potest alterutra earum satiari: ergo non potest eas disjunctive cannot be satisfied by either of them. Therefore, he cannot desire them
appetere per modum ultimi finis, sed necessarium est, ut ap- disjunctively in the way an ultimate end is desired, but it is necessary
petat aggregatum utriusque tanquam ultimum. Antecedens 160R that he desire the aggregate of each of them as ultimate. The antecedent
patet, quia si quis velit interficere Petrum, aut furari bona is clear because if someone wishes to kill Peter or to steal his goods, he
160 ejus, peccat peccato furti et homicidii: ergo signum est illum sins by the sins of theft and homicide. Therefore, it is a sign that he
consentire in utrumque peccatum, atque adeo utrumque velle. shared in each sin and therefore wished each of them. I respond that The solution.
Solutio. Respondetur, eum, qui tantum sub disjunctione vult unum he who only under a disjunction wishes one of two does not in real-
e duobus, revera non velle absolute et simpliciter utrumque. 165R ity absolutely and unqualifiedly want each of them. This is clear, first,
Quod patet primo, quia cum illo proposito stat voluntas efficax because with that purpose the will stands effective not by committing
165 non committendi utrumque. Secundo, quia homo id tantum to each of them. Second, because the human who only wants what he
vult, quod sibi proponit per modum objecti, proponit autem proposes to himself in the mode of an object, proposes a disjunction
sibi disjunctum, ut in alterutra parte exequendum, et non in to himself so that he pursues either part but not both at the same time.
utraque simul. Tertio, quia qui vult orare, vel eleemosynam 170R Third, because he who wishes either to worship or to give alms does not
facere, non ita meretur sicut ille, qui vult orare, et eleemosy- thereby earn merit just as the one who wishes to worship and give alms.
170 nam facere. Et idem est in malis objectis, præsertim si sint And the same is true in bad objects, especially if they are of the same
ejusdem rationis: qui enim proponit furari decem vel a Petro, nature. For he who proposes either to steal ten from Peter or ten from
vel a Paulo, non ita peccat, ac si proponeret furari decem a Paul does not sin the same degree as if he were to steal ten from Peter
Petro, et decem a Paulo: ergo voluntas, quæ fertur ad aliquod 175R and ten from Paul. Therefore, the will which is brought to some dis-
disjunctum, non est absoluta respectu singularium partium, junction is not absolute with respect to a single part but rather is only
175 sed potius tantum secundum quid et quasi conditionaliter, et [brought] qualifiedly and as if conditionally. And therefore if those
ideo si membra illa tantum materialiter diversa sint, illa vol- members are only materially diverse, that willing is equivalent in force

-- 5 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 6
untas æquivalet voluntati unius rei determinatæ habentis eam- to a willing for one determinate thing having the same goodness or bad-
dem bonitatem, vel malitiam: in illo autem exemplo in con- 180R ness. Moreover, in that example brought in for the contrary, because
trarium adducto, quia in singulis membris disjunctiones sunt in the single members the disjunctions are formally diverse badnesses,
180 malititæ formaliter diversæ, ideo opus voluntatis ab utraque therefore the work of the will takes up badness from each of those parts,
illarum partium sumit malitiam, quia non solum peccat volun- because not only does the will sin absolutely in willing a corrupt act,
tas absolute volendo pravum actum, sed etiam volendo illum but also in willing it under a condition, namely, in the absence of some-
sub conditione, scilicet in defectu alterius, et quia in eo casu 185R thing else. And because in that case it consents conditionally in each of
in utrumque consentit saltem conditionaliter, ideo utriusque them, therefore it participates in the badness of each of them, although
185 malitiam participat, quamvis utraque fit minor, quam si objec- each of them becomes less than if the object were conjunctively willed.
tum esset copulative volitum. Unde propter eamdem causam Hence, on account of the same cause, if someone consents to a disjunc-
si quis consentiat in objectum disjunctum constans una parte tive object that clearly is morally good (honesta) in part and shameful in
honesta, et altera turpi, simpliciter peccat ea malitia, quam sub 190R part, he unqualifiedly sins by that badness which he desires under the
disjunctione appetit, ut si proponat subvenire proximo, vel ex disjunction (for example, if he proposed to assist his neighbour, either
190 propriis bonis, vel ex alienis, furando illa, si aliter non possit ei with his own goods or with foreigners’ goods, plundering them if he
subvenire. could not assist him otherwise).
Ad 1. & 2.
argum. in n. 1.
9. Ad argumenta initio facta, primum solutum est expli- 9. To the arguments made at the beginning, the first was resolved To the 1st and
2nd arguments in
n. 1.
cando primam conclusionem. Ad secundum vero facile re- 195R in explaining the first conclusion. And to the second is easily responded
spondetur, eum, qui mutat intentionem finis ultimi, hoc ipso that he who changes his intention for the ultimate end by the very do-
195 retractare priorem intentionem, et ideo neque <33> actu, ing of this retracts his former intention and therefore neither actually
neque virtute intendere duos ultimos fines. nor virtually intends two ultimate ends.
Ad 3. in eodem
num. 2.
Responsio
Adriani.
10. De tertio vero argumento multa scribuntur ab auc- 10. But concerning the third argument many things are written by To the 3rd
argument in n. 2.
Adrianus’s
response.
toribus, sed quando illa difficultas ad materiam de peccatis, in 200R authors, but when that difficulty concerning the matter of sin appears
tract. 5, spectat, breviter est expedienda. Primo ergo respon- in treatise 5, it should be briefly explained. First, therefore, Adrianus3
200 det Adrianus, quodl. 5, art. 3, negando eum, qui peccat mor- responds in Quæstiones Quodlibeticæ q. 5, art. 3, by denying that he
taliter necessario constituere ultimum finem suum in creatura, who sins mortally necessarily sets his ultimate end in a created thing
quia revera non diligit illam plus quam Deum, imo nec plus because he does not really love that more than God, nor, indeed, more
quam rem aliam temporalem: qui enim peccat, verbi gratia, 205R than another temporal thing. In fact, he who sins, for example, for the
propter voluptatem carnis, non daret totam substantiam suam sake of carnal pleasure would not give his complete substance so that
205 ut ea voluptate frueretur brevi tempore: ergo non diligit il- he might enjoy that pleasure for a brief time. Therefore, he does not
lam voluptatem plus quam substantiam. Rursus, illemet, qui love that pleasure more than [his] substance. Again, he who sins in this
sic peccat propter concupiscentiam, fortasse non negasset fi- way for the sake of concupiscence perhaps did not deny the faith and
dem et religionem divinam, etiamsi oporteret totam substan- 210R divine religion, even if he might have to destroy [his] entire substance.
tiam perdere: ergo illemet amat Deum plus quam substan- Therefore, he loves God more than his substance; therefore, more than
210 tiam suam: ergo plus quam voluptatem: ergo signum est il- pleasure. Therefore, this is a sign that that human, when he thus sinned
lum hominem, dum sic peccavit mortaliter, non amasse illam mortally, did not love that pleasure more than everything else nor more
3Born Adriaan Florenszoon Boeyen; became for a short time the unhappy Pope Adrian VI.
201 in creatura ] increatura V.

-- 6 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 7
voluptatem plus quam omnia, nec plus quam Deum, nec per than God; nor [did he love it] in the way an ultimate end is loved.
modum ultimi finis. Et similia argumenta multiplicat Adri- 215R And Adrian multiplies similar arguments, most of which are collected
anus, quæ magna ex parte congerit Medina: et juxta hanc sen- by [Bartolomé de] Medina. And with this view the response to the
215 tentiam est facilis responsio ad argumenta. arguments is easy.
Rejicitur a
Caietan. & aliis.
11. Tamen Cajetanus, Conradus, Medina et alii hanc sen- 11. Nevertheless, Cajetan, Conradus, Medina, and others gener- It is rejected by
Cajetan and
others.
tentiam communiter rejiciunt, asserentes, qui mortaliter pec- ally reject this view, asserting that he who sins mortally does set his
cat, constituere finem ultimum in creatura. Et videtur aperta 220R ultimate end in a created thing. And it clearly appears to be the view
sententia D. Thomæ 2, 2, quæst. 24, art. 10, ad 2, ubi dicit, of St. Thomas in [ST ] IIaIIæ.24.10 ad 2, where he says: ‘Cupidity is
220 duplex est cupiditas; una, qua finis in creatura constituitur, quæ two-fold: one, by which the end is placed in a created thing, which al-
mortificat totaliter charitatem, cum sit venenum ipsius, etc., ubi together kills charity, since it is its poison . . . ’.4 He must be speaking
necesse est loqui de fine ultimo. In eadem est sententia Sco- here of an ultimate end. Scotus’s view is the same in [Sent.] I, dist. 1,
tus, in 1, dist. 1, q. 5, ubi dicit peccatorem, quantum in se est, 225R q. 5, where he says: ‘a sinner, insofar as he is in himself, enjoys a cre-
frui creatura; loquitur autem de fruitione simpliciter prout est ated thing’. Moreover, he speaks of enjoyment strictly speaking as it is
225 ultimi finis. Cui sententiæ favet modus loquendi sacræ Scrip- of an ultimate end. The mode of speaking in the holy Scriptures sup-
turæ ut est illud ad Philip. 3: Quorum Deus venter est; et illud ports this view, for example, that [passage] from Phil. 3[:19], ‘whose
Jerem. 3: Me dereliquerunt fontem aquæ vivæ. Unde sumitur God is the belly’, and that from Jer. 3 [i.e., 2:13]: ‘They have forsaken
ratio: nam qui peccat mortaliter, avertitur a Deo tanquam ab 230R me, the fountain of living water’. Whence the argument is taken: For
ultimo fine: ergo convertitur ad creaturam, ut ad finem ulti- he who sins mortally is turned from God just as from an ultimate end.
230	Eorum responsio
ad 3. argum.
mum. Juxta hanc vero opinionem ad difficultatem tactam re- Thefore, he is turned to a created thing as to an ultimate end. But con-
spondent aliqui, peccatorem non converti ad creaturam, circa cerning this opinion some respond to the mentioned difficulty that the Their response to
the 3rd argument.	quam peccat, ut ad finem ultimum, sed ad seipsum, quem sinner does not turn to the created thing concerning which he sins as
Non citat verba,
sed sensum.
diligit plusquam Deum, juxta illud Matth. 10: Qui diligit an- 235R to an ultimate end, but to himself, whom he loves more than God, as
imam suam plusquam me, non est me dignus, et illud Augus- that [passage says] in Matth. 10: ‘Whoever loves his soul more than me He does not cite
words, but sense.	235 tini 14, de Civit., cap. ult.: Amor sui usque ad con- <col. b> is not worthy of me’5 and that [passage] from the last chapter of book
temptum Dei ædificat civitatem Balylonis, unde D. Thomas 1, 14 of Augustine’s City of God: ‘Self-love up to contempt of God builds
2, quæst. 77, art. 4, dicit omnia peccata oriri ex amore sui. the city of Babylon’. Hence, St. Thomas says in [ST ] IaIIæ.77.4 that
Non satisfacit. Sed hæc responsio non satisfacit, quia ipse peccator non est fi- 240R all sins arise from self-love. But this response does not satisfy, because It is not
satisfactory.	nis cujus, sed cui amatur bonum illud, cujus gratia peccat, et the sinner himself is not the finis cuius, but rather the finis cui, [i.e., the
240 de illo bono dicitur quod habeat rationem finis ultimi illius end for whom] that good for the sake of which he sins is loved. And
peccati, nec est contra rationem finis ultimi, quod alicui ap- concerning that good is said that it has the nature of the ultimate end
petatur. Unde propter illud bonum censetur peccator deserere of that sin, nor is it contrary to the nature of an ultimate end that it
Deum, et illo fruitur tanquam bono adepto et sufficienti sibi. 245R is desired for something else. Hence, on account of that good the sin-
Aliorum
responsio
probabilis.
Quapropter aliter responderi potest, si plura peccata mortalia ner is thought to forsake God and he enjoys that just as a good that is
245 tantum successive committantur, tunc peccatorem toties inten- both attained and sufficient for him. For this reason one can respond A probable
response of
others.
dere vel mutare finem ultimum, quoties de novo mortaliter in another way: if many mortal sins are committed only successively,
4Quotation is not exact.
5I am not sure which verse Suárez has in mind. Cf. vss. 37–38: ‘Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and whoever loves son or daughter more
than me is not worthy of me; and whoever does not take up the cross and follow me is not worthy of me’.

-- 7 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 8
peccat, præsertim si peccatum sit diversum a præcedentibus, then the sinner intends or changes his ultimate end as many times as he
vel illi repugnans quantum ad conversionem: nam quamvis 250R sins mortally concerning something new, especially if the sin is differ-
præcedentia peccata semper moveant habitualiter, et quantum ent from the preceding ones or incompatible with it insofar as turning
250 ad reatum, tamen intentio actualis, vel virtualis peccantis mu- to it. For although the preceding sins always move habitually and with
tari potest, atque boc modo semper manet fixa in uno ultimo respect to guilt, nevertheless the actual or virtual intention of the sin-
fine. Si autem simul committat plura peccata mortalia, tunc ner can be changed and in this way always remain fixed on one ultimate
non convertitur ad singula objecta talium peccatorum ut ad 255R end. If, however, he commits many mortal sins at the same time, then
fines ultimos totales, sed partiales tantum, et ultimus finis to- he is not turned to a single object of such sins as to complete ultimate
255 talis erit aggregatum ex illis omnibus. Et hæc responsio est ends but only as to partial [ends], and the complete ultimate end will
probabilis et facile sustineri potest. be the aggregate of all those. And this response is probable and can
easily be supported.
Notatio ad
probabiliorem
responsionem.
12. Vera tamen doctrina, ut existimo, est, dupliciter intel- 260R 12. Nevertheless, it is a true doctrine, as I think, that to say that Notes towards a
more probable
response.
ligi posse eum, qui mortaliter peccat, ponere ultimum finem in he who sins mortally places the ultimate end in creatures can be un-
creatura primo formaliter ac propria intentione: secundo tan- derstood in two ways: first, by a formal and proper intention, second,
260 tum interpretative, seu imputative. Prior modus verus non est, by an intention that is only interpretative or imputed. In the first way,
ut recte probant argumenta Adriani et exempla ipsa: non enim it is not true, as the arguments of Adrian and the examples themselves
omnis peccator dum peccat, ita diligit creaturam circa quam 265R rightly proved. For not every sinner while he sins thus loves the cre-
peccat ut se, et omnia sua in illam referat, et ut illam amet ated thing concerning which he sins so that he refers himself and all his
expresse, et formaliter tanquam bonum sibi sufficiens: quin actions to it and so that he loves it expressly and formally as his suffi-
265 potius nec semper amatur ut finis proximus res illa, circa quam cient good. On the contrary, that thing concerning which he sins is not
peccatur, sed solum ut medium; ut cum quis furatur propter even always loved as a proximate end but only as a means. For example,
mœchiam, non constituit finem in objecto furti, quantum est 270R when someone is enraged on account of an adulteress, he does not con-
ex formali intentione sua. Posterior igitur modus verus est, stitute his end in the object of his rage insofar as his formal intention is
nam quia peccator propter bonum creatum deserit suum finem concerned. Therefore, in the latter way it is true, for because the sinner
270 ultimum et bonum illud præfert divinæ amicitiæ, ideo inter- deserts his ultimate end on account of a good created thing and prefers
pretative censetur diligere illam creaturam plus quam Deum, that good to divine friendship, he therefore is thought interpretatively
ut amicum et ultimum finem: et hac ratione imputative et in- 275R to love that created thing more than God as a friend and ultimate end.
terpretative dicitur ponere ultimum finem in creatura. And for this reason he is said interpretatively and by imputation to
place his ultimate end in a created thing.
Auctoris
responsio ad
3. argum. in fine
num. 2.
13. Ex qua doctrina est facilis responsio ad difficultatem 13. With this doctrine there is an easy response to the posited diffi- The response of
the author to the
3rd argument at
the end of n. 2.
275 positam: cum enim dicimus, non posse aliquem intendere culty. For when we say that someone cannot intend multiple ultimate
plures ultimos fines, <34> intelligendum id est de propria et 280R ends, it should be understood concerning proper and formal intention,
formali intentione, nam in hac reperitur repugnantia supra for in this is found the repugnance posited above. But on the other
posita, at vero interpretative tantum, et secundum moralem hand if it is only about interpretative intention and according to moral
imputationem non repugnat intendere plura ut ultimos fines, imputation, then it is not repugnant to intend multiple things as ulti-
280 quia tunc in actibus formalibus non est repugnantia, quia mate ends, because then there is not a repugnance in formal acts, be-
neuter eorum tendit in objectum suum formaliter, ut in sum- 285R cause neither of them tends to the object itself formally, as sufficient
mum bonum sufficiens: id autem quod implicite tantum, et in- for the highest good. Moreover, that which only implicitly and inter-

-- 8 of 9 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 3 9
terpretative continetur in actu, non variat rationem operis, nec pretatively is contained in the act does not vary the nature of the work
modum operandi; unde fit, ut peccator in informali modo suo nor the mode of acting. Hence it happens that the sinner in his infor-
285 operandi aliquid amet ut medium, et tamen illi imputetur, ac mal mode of acting loves something as a means and yet it is imputed to
si amaret ut finem: et idem est de amore talis objecti super alia 290R him as if he had loved it as end. And likewise concerning love of such
bona: nam quantum est ex formali affectu, non semper diligit an object beyond other goods. For insofar as it is from a formal affect,
illud plus quam alia omnia: tamen interpretative illi imputatur, the person does not always love it more than all others. Nevertheless,
ac si ita diligeret. interpretatively it is imputed to him as if he loves it thus.

-- 9 of 9 --
