Last revision: October 27, 2015	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
De fine hominis disp. 1, sect. 31
© Sydney Penner 2011
<6>2
Utrum finis exerceat causalitatem suam sub ratione boni Whether an end exercises its causality under the aspect of cog-
cogniti. nized good.
Explicuimus causalitatem finis et effectum ejus: sequitur We have explained the causality of an end and its effect. The
ut dicamus de ratione causandi, seu de virtute, per quam next thing to talk about is the ratio of its causing or the force
5 causat. De qua duo sunt certa, circa quæ alia erunt du- 5R through which it causes. Two things are certain concerning this,
bitanda et explicanda. but other related matters that are doubtful and should be ex-
plained.
Finis ratio, seu
virtus per quam
causat, est
bonitas.
Ostenditur
auctoritate
D. Thom. et
aliorum.
1. Primo igitur certum est, finem in suo genere causare, 1. The first thing, then, that is certain is that the end causes The ratio of the
end or the force
through which
it causes is
goodness.
It is shown by
the authority of
St. Thomas and
others.
quatenus quoddam bonum, et conveniens est. Hæc est in its genus insofar as it is a kind of good and agreeable thing.3
sententia D. Thomæ 1, 2, quæst. 1, a. 1, in fine corporis, 10R This is St. Thomas’s view in ST IaIIæ.1.1, co. (towards the end).
10 quam late tractat 3, cont. Gentes, cap. 2 et 3, ubi probat, He discusses it more thoroughly in SCG III, c. 2 and 3, where
idem esse operari propter finem, et propter bonum: et he shows that to act for the sake of the end is the same as to
1 p., q. 5, a. 4, similiter probat bonum habere rationem act for the sake of the good. In ST Ia.5.4 he likewise shows that
finis, ubi in solutione ad 2, in hunc modum explicat il- good has the ratio of an end, where in his solution ad 2 he in this
lud Dionysii 4, c. de Divinis nominibus: Bonum est diffu- 15R way explains Dionysius’s statement from On the Divine Names,
15 sivum sui. Eamdem doctrinam habet Alensis, 1 p., q. 17, c. 4: ‘Goodness is self-diffusive’. [Alexander] of Hales holds the
memb. 3. et 34, memb. 1, et colligitur ex Aristotele, 1 same doctrine in Sent. I, q. 17, memb. 3 and q. 34, memb. 1, and
Ethicor., cap. 7, dicente: Id esse unicuique bonum, cujus it is gathered from Aristotle, who says in EN I, c. 7: ‘That is the
gratia cætera operantur. Idem lib. I Ethic., in fine, et 2, good of each for whose sake everything else is done’ [1097a17–
Item ratione. Phys., cap. 3, ubi dicit, finem et bonum idem esse. Ratio 20R 18]. Likewise at the end of book I and in Phys. II, c. 3, where he
20 vero constat ex dictis, quia causalitas finis in hoc consis- says: ‘the end and the good are the same’.4 And the reason is And by reason.
tit, quod trahit voluntatem ad se propter se amandum, clear from what was said, for the causality of the end consists in
vel alia propter ipsum: sed nihil potest trahere volun- drawing the will to itself on account of being loved in itself or
tatem nisi bonum, quatenus bonum est: ergo bonitas est to other things for its sake. But nothing can draw the will except
a qua habet finis virtutem causandi finaliter; est ergo illi 25R something good insofar as it is good. Therefore, goodness is that
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition; in some cases I have followed the 1628 edition. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628 edition. Most of those, though not
all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition, M = 1629 Mainz edition, and V = Vivès
edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivès edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.
3This claim is treated at greater length in DM 23.5.
4195a22–25?

-- 1 of 5 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 1, sect. 3 2
25 ratio causandi. by which an end has the power of final-causing and is, therefore,
the ratio of causing for it.
Exponitur
Caietanus circa
rationem
causandi
finaliter.
2. Hanc autem veritatem per se claram, obscuri- 2. This truth which is clear in itself is rendered rather ob- Cajetan on the
nature of
final-causing is
explained.
orem reddit Cajetanus, 1 p., art. 4, q. 5, dicens, bonitatem scure by Cajetan when he says in [his commentary on] ST Ia.4.5
formalem esse ipsam rationem causæ finalis in actu ex- 30R that formal goodness is the very ratio of the final cause in the
ercito, non vero in actu signato, nisi tantum fundamen- exercised act but not in the signified act, unless merely funda-
30 taliter. Quorum verborum sensus in idem redit. Nam mentally. The sense of those words comes to the same thing. For
per hoc nomen bonum non explicatur res sub habitu- through this word ‘good’ one does not indicate a thing under a
dine ad effectum, seu actum finaliter causandi, et hoc disposition to an effect or to an act of final-causing (and Cajetan
vocavit Cajetanus finem in actu signato, quam rationem 35R calls this the end in the signified act). The ratio of ‘good’ does not
non <col. b> significat formaliter ratio boni, sed tantum formally signify this ratio. Rather, it only indicates the perfection
35 explicat perfectionem objecti, seu convenientiam quam of the object or the agreeability which it has to the will, as a re-
habet cum voluntate, ex qua habet quod finalisare pos- sult of which it has that which allows it to final-cause. The name
sit, quam habitudinem formaliter explicat nomen, seu or ratio of an end indicates this disposition. For this reason it
ratio finis: et ideo dicitur fundari in bonitate. Et hoc 40R is said to be founded in goodness. And in this way Cajetan said
modo dixit Cajetanus bonum significare rationem finis that ‘good’ signifies the ratio of an end in the exercised act fun-
40 in actu exercito fundamentaliter, ac si in causa efficiente damentally, as if we were to say that in an efficient cause heat,
diceremus calorem, verbi gratia, esse finem agentis fun- for example, is the agent’s end fundamentally, yet as such it does
damentaliter, tamen ut sic non significare formaliter ip- not formally signify the disposition itself of the efficient cause.
sam habitudinem efficientis.
Secundo certum est ut bonum causet finaliter nec- 45R Secondly, it is certain that in order for good to final-cause it
45 essarium esse ut cognitum sit; quia appetitus vitalis se- is necessary that it have been cognized, because the vital ap-
quitur formam apprehensam, et ideo ferri non potest petite follows an apprehended form and therefore cannot be
nisi in objectum cognitum ut constat ex philosophia, et brought to anything other than a cognized object. This is clear
ex 1 p., quæst. 80 et sequentib., et ex quæst. 8 et 9, 1, 2, from the philosophers and from Sent. p. 1, q. 80 and follow-
viderique possunt quæ scripsi in disp. 23, Metaphysicæ, 50R ing and from ST IaIIæ.8–9. And what I wrote can be seen in
50 sect. 7, et libr. 2, de Orat. mentali, cap. 13. Hinc vero DM 23.7 and De Orat. mentali lib. 2, c. 13.5 But from here has
oriebatur occasio disputandi quomodo se habebat esse arisen an occasion for disputing how cognitive being (esse cog-
cognitum ad rationem causandi finalem, an scilicet sit nitum) is related to the nature of final-causing, whether, namely,
tantum conditio necessaria, vel etiam ratio causandi, et it is only a necessary condition or also a ratio of causing, and
consequenter an bonum cognitum causet finaliter se- 55R consequently whether cognized good final-causes according to
55 cundum esse cognitum, vel secundum esse reale. Quam cognitive being or according to real being. This question is dis-
quæstionem late tractat 1, 2, quæst. 1, art. 1, Medina, et cussed more thoroughly in Medina’s and Cajetan’s [commen-
Cajetanus ibid., et antea in 1 part., quæst. 5, art. 4, et Fer- taries on] ST IaIIæ.1.1 and before that in Ia.5.4, and by Ferrara
5This is presumably one of the places where Suárez’s posthumous literary executor deleted material and inserted a reference to his fuller discussions elsewhere.
49 23 ] 13 V.
54 cognitum causet ] causet cognitum M V.

-- 2 of 5 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 1, sect. 3 3
rarius 1, cont. Gent., cap. 44, et aliqui theologi in 2, dist. 1, in [his commentary on] SCG I, c. 44, and by other theologians
præsertim Gabriel, part. 5, alii vero in 2, dist. 25, præser- 60R in Sent. II, dist. 1, especially Gabriel in part. 5, but others, espe-
60 tim Scotus et Capreolus. Sed quoniam hæc res in dis- cially Scotus and Capreolus, in II, dist. 25. But since I discuss this
put. 23 Metaphysicæ, sect., 8, a me late traditur, et, ut ex- matter more thoroughly in DM 23.8, and, as I think, poses no
istimo, nihil difficultatis habet, dicam breviter quæ sen- difficulty, I will say briefly what I think and what is necessary for
tio, et quod ad Quæstiones Theologicas postea tractan- discussing the theological questions afterwards.
das est necessarium.
65	Cognitio objecti
finalizantis non
pertinet ad
rationem
causandi
finaliter, sed est
sola conditio.
3. Advertendum est ergo, interdum appetere vol- 65R 3. It should be noted, then, that sometimes the will desires The cognition
of the
final-causing
object does not
belong to the
ratio of
final-causing
but is only a
condition.
untatem objectum cognitum solum in ordine ad cogni- a cognized object only in relation to cognition, as, for example,
tionem, ut, verbi gratia, quando contemplando rosam when in contemplating a rose it does not desire to possess it but
non appetit illam habere, sed tantum considerare et only to consider and cognize it.6 In that case to be cognized (esse
cognoscere, et tunc esse cognitum non solum est con- cognitum) is not only a condition but also the reason for moving
70 ditio, sed est ratio, movendi voluntatem, quia non solum 70R the will, because not only is the cognition a prerequisite for the
est quid prærequisitum ut voluntas moveatur, sed etiam will to be moved but it is also the terminus of the desire just
est terminus appetitionis, cujusmodi est quæcumque like any other thing that is judged to be agreeable. And in this
alia res quæ judicatur esse conveniens, et hoc modo way when a human being is delighted in the cognition alone but
quando homo delectatur tantum in cognitione non vero not in the cognized thing according to itself, to be cognized is
75 in re cognita secundum se, esse cognitum est id, a quo 75R that from which the act takes its ratio and goodness or badness,
actus accipit suam rationem et bonitatem vel <7> mali- just as when a human being desires to see God, that being seen
tiam: sicut est quando homo appetit videre Deum, il- belongs to the formal object that is the cause of final-causing.
lud esse visum pertinet ad formale objectum, quod est But sometimes the will desires the cognized object so that It is shown
firstly.	causa finalisandi. Aliquando vero voluntas appetit ob- it has and obtains that thing itself, as when it desires health. In
80 jectum cognitum ut re ipsa illud habeat et consequatur, 80R that case, the ratio of final-causing is clearly the goodness that
Ostenditur 1. ut quando appetit sanitatem, et tunc plane ratio final- the object has or is thought to have in reality. For the former
isandi est bonitas, quam in reipsa objectum habet, vel is the will’s end to which the impetus of the agent tends. But it
habere apprehendit, quia illud est finis voluntatis, in does not tend except to the real being of the end itself, in order
quod tendit impetus agentis, sed non tendit nisi in esse to have and obtain it. Therefore.
85	Ostenditur 2. reale ipsius finis, ut illud habeat et obtineat: ergo. Item, 85R Likewise, that has the proper ratio of an end by the achieve- It is shown
secondly.	illud habet propriam rationem finis, quo consecuto, qui- ment of which the will is at rest and by the lack of which it is
escit voluntas, et quo deficiente frustratur ab intentione frustrated from its intention. The will, however, is not at rest
sua, sed non quiescit in sola apprehensione, nisi re ipsa in the apprehension alone, unless that attains the end in reality,
finem consequatur, et nisi hoc obtineat, frustrari dici- and it is said to be frustrated unless the latter is obtained. This is
90 tur: ergo signum est moveri a fine secundum suum esse 90R an indication, then, that the will is moved by the end according
6Cf. De Actibus Qui Vocantur Passiones Tum Etiam de Habitibus 1.5.3.
59 vero ] om. V.
83 habere ] om. M V.
89 consequatur ] consequantur V.

-- 3 of 5 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 1, sect. 3 4
Existentia realis
non ingreditur
etiam rationem
causandi
finaliter.
reale. Non est autem intelligendum requiri ad causali- to its real being.
tatem finis quod res illa, quæ est finis a parte rei præex- Nor should one understand as required for the causality of Real existence
is not even a
constituent of
the ratio of
final-causing.
istat, quia cum solum moveat metaphorice per cogni- the end that the thing that is the end pre-exist in reality, since it
tionem, satis est quod animo apprehendatur, et quasi is sufficient that it be apprehended by the mind and be repre-
95 in imagine repræsentetur; sensus ergo est rem illam 95R sented in an image, as it were. The sense, therefore, is that that
secundum esse reale, quod objicitur, et in ea appre- thing moves the will and has the causality of an end according
henditur, movere voluntatem, et habere causalitatem to the real being that is presented and is apprehended in it. It
finis, quia secundum illud esse judicatur conveniens: moves, moreover, as we said, insofar as it is judged agreeable.
movet autem, ut diximus, quatenus conveniens judi- For this reason, the cognition of this agreeability and goodness
100 catur; cognitio igitur hujus convenientiæ et bonitatis, 100R is not properly the ratio of moving, because in this case the will
non est propria ratio movendi, quia tunc voluntas non does not desire to cognize. But the cognition is said to be nec-
appetit cognoscere, sed dicitur esse cognitio necessaria essary in the mode of coming close, not, indeed, according to
per modum approximationis, non quidem secundum place, but only according to the subordination of the soul’s pow-
locum, sed tantum subordinationem potentiarum an- ers, and because without that the end does not have that mode
105 imæ; et quia sine illa non habet finis illum modum quo 105R which it needs for its causality. And this view is clearer when
indiget ad suam causalitatem. Et hoc modo explicata explained in this way, as is clear from Scotus, Gabriel, Cajetan,
hæc sententia clarior est, ut patet ex Scoto, Gabriele, Ca- and Ferrara in the places cited above, and it has no difficulty of
jetano et Ferrario, locis supra citatis, et nullam habet dif- any importance.
ficultatem alicujus momenti.
110	Notatio pro
præcedente
doctrina.
4. Ut tamen facile dissolvantur multa argumenta, 4. Nevertheless, so that the many arguments which Med- A note
concerning the
preceding
doctrine.
quæ hic multiplicat Medina; oportet ultimo advertere, 110R ina multiplies in this place are easily resolved, it is necessary fi-
quod sicut in causa efficiente approximatio non est ratio nally to notice that just as in the case of an efficient cause coming
agendi, sed conditio, potest tamen ratione illius variari close together is not the ratio of acting but a condition for it and
actio, si diversum agens applicetur, ita et in hac appre- yet the action can be varied by reason of it, if a different agent
115 hensione, seu cognitione intellectus, contingere potest, is applied, so also it can happen with this apprehension or cog-
ut ratione illius varietur actio voluntatis, si in objecte 115R nition by the intellect that by reason of it the action of the will
aliud esse, seu aliam rationem apprehendat boni, vel is varied, if some other being or another aspect of good or bad
mali: quo sensu dici solet finem specificare actum vo- is apprehended in the object. The end is usually said to spec-
luntatis, non ut in re est, sed ut apprehenditur: nam licet ify the act of the will in this sense, not as it is in reality but as it
120 eleemosyna, verbi gratia, in re sit bona, si quis illam ex- is apprehended. For although giving alms, for example, is good
istimat malam, actio voluntatis non est bona, sed mala. 120R in reality, if someone thinks it bad, the action of the will is not
Propter quam rationem videtur dixisse divus Thomas, good but bad. For this reason St. Thomas seems to have said in
1, 2, quæst. 31, artic. 3, ad 1, cum objectum voluntatis ST IaIIæ.31.3 ad 1 that when the object of the will is apprehended
sit bonum apprehensum, diversitatem apprehensionis as good, difference of apprehension belongs to difference of the
125 pertinere ad diversitatem objecti, atque idem sentit Ca- object. And Cajetan thinks the same in q. 30, art. 3. But these are
jetanus, q. 30, art. 3. Sed hæc non sunt contraria, quia 125R not contraries, because apprehension of the good now varies
tunc apprehensio boni tantum variat objectum in quan- the object only insofar as different being of the object is appre-
tum in illo apprehendit et applicat diversum esse ob- hended and appplied in it and consequently different goodness

-- 4 of 5 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 1, sect. 3 5
jecti, atque adeo distinctam bonitatem, vel convenien- or agreeability, which, as I said, is the ratio of moving the will.
130 tiam, quæ, ut dixi, est ratio movendi voluntatem. Quo- Wherefore, when it is said that the object moves ‘as ap-
circa quando dicitur objectum movere ut apprehen- 130R prehended’, one should avoid equivocation in that reduplicating
sum, cavenda est æquivocatio in illa particula redupli- phrase. For if it only reduplicates the denomination arising from
cante: nam si reduplicet solam denominationem prove- the apprehension such that the apprehension itself is the form
nientem ab apprehensione ita ut ipsa apprehensio sit through which the end moves, the statement is false, as I said.
135 forma, per quam finis movet, falsum est, ut dixi, si autem But if the objective being itself (which is apprehended) is redu-
reduplicet ipsum esse objectivum, quod apprehendit, 135R plicated, the expression is true. In the same way the diversity
sic vera est locutio, atque eodem modo diversitas cogni- of cognition, which holds only on the part of the power, either
tionis, quæ se tenet tantum ex parte potentiæ, aut cog- in cognition or in the proper qualities of the act of understand-
nitionis, seu in propriis qualitatibus ipsius actus intelli- ing itself (some examples are that it is clear, or obscure, and so
140 gendi, ut sunt, verbi gratia, quod sit clara, vel obscura, et on), this diversity, I say, does not vary the ratio of the end and
similis, hæc, inquam, diversitas non variat rationem fi- 140R consequently neither the motion of the will.
nis, et consequenter nec motionem voluntatis: at vero But, on the other hand, the diversity of cognition which re-
diversitas cognitionis, quæ redundat in objecto, scilicet dounds to the object (namely, because something else is cog-
quia aliud est quod cognoscitur, vel alia proprietas in eo nized or other properties are apprehended in it) varies the end
145 apprehenditur, hæc variat finem et motionem, quia pro- and the motion, because it proposes and approaches the sub-
ponit, et appropinquat subjectum secundum aliud esse 145R ject according to other objective being. Hence it diversifies it,
objectivum: unde quasi diversificat illud, et sic reddit di- as it were, and so delivers different cognition not on the part
versam cognitionem non ex parte esse cogniti absoluti, of cognitive being absolutely, but on the part of the object that
sed ex parte objecti quod cognoscitur. Et hæc de causal- is cognized. And that [suffices] concerning the causality, effect,
150 itate, effectu et principio, seu forma, quæ est principium and principle or form, which is the principle of an end.
finis.
138 se ] om. V.

-- 5 of 5 --
