Last revision: February 5, 2011	Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE FINE HOMINIS DISP. 3, SECT. 61
© Sydney Penner 2010
<37>2
Utrum omnes actiones hominis sint propter ultimum finem sim- Whether all the actions of a human being are for the sake of an unqualifiedly
pliciter, saltem ex inclinatione. ultimate end, at least by inclination.
Arguitur pro
parte neg.
1. Ratio dubitandi est, quia vel est sermo de fine ultimo for- 1. The reason for doubting is that the discussion is either about the formal It is argued for
the negative side.	mali, aut de fine ultimo materiali, seu de re illa, ad quam homo ultimate end or about the material ultimate end or that thing to which a
5 natura sua tendit ut ad ultimum finem, neutro autem modo vide- 5R human being tends by his nature as to an ultimate end, but a human being
tur homo operari semper propter <col. b> ultimum finem. De does not seem always to act for the sake of an ultimate end in either case.
primo patet, quia, ut supra dixi, sectione 1, num. 6, intentio finis It is clear concerning the first, because, as I said above in sect. 1, n. 6, an
ultimi formalis non sufficit ad electiones faciendas: atque adeo intention for a formal ultimate end is not enough to choose what needs
nec ad operandum propter finem ex propria intentione ipsius to be done. And therefore it is also not enough for acting for the sake of
10 hominis operantis: ergo nec etiam naturalis proportio ad hunc 10R the end by a proper intention of the acting human being. Nor, therefore,
finem formalem sufficit ut homo in omni actu suo dicatur op- is a natural proportion to this formal end enough for a human being to
erari propter ultimum finem hunc, ex inclinatione naturæ, quia be said in all his acts to act for the sake of this ultimate end from an
non omnia, quæ amat, sunt media ad hunc finem. Altera pars inclination of nature, because not everything that he loves is a means to
probatur, quia finis ultimus, ad quem homo natura sua tendit, est this end. The other part is shown, because the ultimate end to which a
15 Deus; sed non omnia, quæ homo operatur, tendunt in Deum, ut 15R human being tends by his nature is God, but not all acts which a human
patet maxime de actibus malis, seu peccatis: ergo. being performs tend to God, as is most clear concerning bad acts or sins.
Therefore.
2. Hæc quæstio facillime expediri potest, suppositis his, quæ 2. This question can be resolved most easily by first considering those
supra dicta sunt, in disp. 2, sect. 4, de variis modis operandi things which I said above in disp. 2, sect. 4, concerning the various ways
propter finem: nam hic modus, de quo nunc agimus, non re- 20R of acting for the sake of an end. For the way with which we are concerned
20 quirit propriam intentionem ipsius operantis vel præsentem, vel now does not require the agent to have a proper intention, either present
præteritam, sed solum interpretativam, quæ censetur contineri or past, but only an interpretative intention. An interpretative intention
in ipso objecto proximo humanæ operationis, seu voluntatis is thought to be contained in the proximate object itself of human action
quatenus illud natura sua tendit in aliud, vel tanquam medium or will insofar as the object by its nature tends to another [object], either
1. Assertio
affirm. de fine
formali probatur
auctorit.
ad finem, vel tanquam pars ad totum. Unde dicendum est primo, 25R as a means to an end or as a part to a whole.
25 hominem in omnibus actibus suis, tam bonis, quam malis, oper- Hence, it should be said, firstly, that a human being in all his ac- The first
assertion
affirmative about
the formal end is
proven by
authority.
ari aliquo modo propter ultimum finem formalem ex naturali tions, good as well as bad, acts in some way for the sake of a formal ul-
1Latin text is from Vivès edition. In some cases I have followed the 1628 edition, though I have not compared the two texts exhaustively. Marginal notes are as found in the 1628
edition. Most of those, though not all and not always in the right place, are included in the Vivès edition as italicised text. For recorded variants, A = 1628 edition and V = Vivès
edition.
2Numbers in angle brackets indicate page numbers in the Vivés edition for ease of reference, given that it is the most widely used edition.

-- 1 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 6 2
connexione cujuscumque objecti voluntatis cum tali fine. Ita est timate end by a natural connection between any object of the will what-
intelligendus D. Thomas 1, 2, q. 1, art. 6, ut clarius idem ex- ever and such an end. This is how St. Thomas should be understood in
plicuit in 4, dist. 49, q. 1, art. 3, quæstiunc. 4, ubi cæteri theologi 30R [ST ] IaIIæ.1.6, as he has more clearly explained in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49,
30 idem sentiunt præter eos, qui existimant voluntatem posse ferri q. 1, art. 3, quæstiunc. 4, where other theologians think the same (besides
in malum sub ratione mali, quod improbabile est, ut nunc sup- those who think that the will can be brought to bad under the aspect of
pono. Et colligitur eadem conclusio ex Aristotele 1, Ethicorum, bad, which is improbable, as I currently assume). And the same conclu-
cap. 4 et 7, et 1, Rhetor., cap. 5, et est frequens apud Augustinum sion is gathered from Aristotle, EN I, c. 4 and 7, and Rhetor. I, c. 5, and
10, Confess., cap. 20 et 21, et lib. 11, de Trinit., cap. 6, lib. 19, 35R is frequently in Augustine in Conf. 10, c. 20 and 21, and De Trin. XI, c. 6,
35 de Civit., cap. 1, et lib. de Epicureis et Stoicis. Nam qui et bonus and De Civ. XIX, c. 1, and the book concerning the Epicureans and Sto-
est, inquit, ideo bonus est, ut beatus sit: et qui malus est, malus ics. ‘For also he who is good’, he says, ‘is good in order to be happy; and
Item ratione. non esset, nisi inde beatum se posse esse speraret. Secundo, ratio he who is bad would not be bad except that he hopes he can thereby be
est clara, quia homo naturaliter appetit complementum omnis happy.’3
boni; in omni autem voluntate sua appetit saltem partem, seu 40R Secondly, the reason is clear: a human being naturally desires a com- The same
assertion proven
by reason.
40 inchoationem aliquam hujus boni: ergo implicite et interpreta- plement of all good. In his every willing, moreover, he desires at least a
tive appetit quidquid appetit, quatenus confert aliquo modo ad part of or some beginning of this good. Therefore, whatever he desires,
suum completum bonum; et hoc est amare illud interpretative he desires implicitly and interpretatively insofar as it contributes in some
Confirmatur. propter ultimum finem formalem. Confirmatur et explicatur, way to his complete good. And this is to love the former interpretatively
quia licet non præcedat in <38> homine intentio elicita hujus 45R for the sake of the formal ultimate end. It is confirmed and explained: It is confirmed.
45 finis, præcedit tamen naturalis propensio in illum, et ab hoc pro- because although an elicited intention for this end does not precede in the
cedunt omnes actus circa particularia bona: ergo saltem impetu human being, yet a natural propensity to it does precede. And all acts
Explicatur. naturæ omnes tendunt in hujusmodi finem. In quibus rationibus concerning particular goods proceed from this propensity. Therefore, all
intelligitur hoc non solum procedere in actionibus liberis, sed [actions] tend to an end of this kind at least by an impetus of nature.
etiam in naturalibus, et in omni appetitu cujuscumque boni. In- 50R In these arguments it is understood that not only does this proceed in It is explained.
50 telligitur etiam hanc habitudinem particularium finium, seu ob- free actions, but also in natural actions and in every desire for whatever
jectorum ad ultimum finem formalem, non tam esse medii ad good. It is also understood that this relation (habitudinem) of particular
finem proprie loquendo, quam partis ad totum secundum ver- ends or objects to the formal ultimate end is not so much of a means to
itatem, aut saltem secundum apparentiam et similitudinem, ut an end, properly speaking, as of a part to a whole, according to truth or
recte D. Thomas explicuit: nam quando homo appetit, verbi gra- 55R at least according to appearance and similitude, as St. Thomas rightly ex-
55 tia, voluptatem, aliquo modo eam existimat partem sui completi plained:4 for when a human being desires, for example, pleasure, in some
boni, quia licet talis voluptas non semper sit illa, quæ vere per- way he thinks of it as a part of his complete good, because although such
tinet ad perfectionem felicitatis humanæ, habet tamen quamdam pleasure is not always that which truly pertains to the perfect happiness
similitudinem cum illa. of a human, nevertheless, it has a certain similitude to that.
Obiectio Scoti
diluitur.
3. Sed objicit Scotus, nam si homo in omni actu suo ap- 60R 3. But Scotus objects: for if a human being in all his acts desired Scotus’s
objection refuted.	60 peteret hoc modo finem ultimum formalem postquam consti- the formal ultimate end in this way after he establishes that end in some
3Sermon 150, n. 4: Nam et qui bonus est, ideo bonus est ut beatus sit; et qui malus est, malus non esset, nisi inde se beatum esse posse speraret.
4Sent. IV, dist. 49, q. 1, art. 3, qc. 4, ad 1.
49 naturalibus, et in ] om. V.

-- 2 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 6 3
tuit finem illum in aliqua re determinata, non posset non oper- determinate thing, he would not be able not to act for the sake of that hap-
ari propter illam beatitudinem in particulari, consequens autem piness in a particular [case]. The consequence, however, is clearly false,
constat esse falsum, nam fidelis cognoscens et credens suam beat- for the faithful person, cognizing and believing that his happiness consists
itudinem consistere in visione Dei, non omnia operatur propter 65R in the vision of God, does not do everything for the sake of that vision
65 illam, imo potius multa contra illam. Respondetur negando ma- but rather does many things against it. I respond by denying the major,
jorem, quia in hoc modo operandi propter finem non est atten- because in this way of acting for the sake of the end there is no particular
denda particularis intentio hominis, ut terminatur ad particu- intention of the human being to be noticed, so that it is terminated in a
larem finem, quia non semper operatur ex illa, semper tamen particular end. For one does not always act from that; nevertheless, one
operatur ex intentione alicujus boni. 70R always acts from an intention for some good or other.
70	2. Assertio affir.
de fine materiali.
4. Secundo dicendum est, hominem in omnibus suis ac- 4. Secondly, it should be said, that a human being in all his actions of The second
assertion
affirmative about
the material end.
tionibus virtutis interpretative operari propter ultimum finem virtue interpretatively acts for the sake of a particular or real ultimate end
particularem, seu realem propter quem est conditus, id est, on account of which he is preserved, that is, on account of God. In this
propter Deum. In hoc etiam omnes conveniunt, quia omne also everyone agrees, because every moral good5 has proportion with the
bonum honestum habet proportionem cum ultimo fine vero, et 75R true ultimate end, from itself tends to God, and can be a suitable means
75 ex se tendit in Deum, et potest esse aptum medium ut referatur in [to God] so that it is referred to God and true felicity. And in this way
Deum et veram felicitatem, atque hoc modo quicumque honeste whatever is done in a morally good way can be said to be done for the sake
Dubium circa
proximam assert.
discutitur.
operatur, dici potest operari propter Deum. Sed difficultas est of God. But the difficulty concerns certain bad [actions], even sins. Can A doubt
concerning the
last assertion is
discussed.
de quibusdam malis etiam peccati, an in his etiam possit homo a human being in these also be said in some way to act for the sake of the
dici aliquo modo operari propter finem, atque adeo propter rem 80R end and even for the sake of that which is the true ultimate end of human
80 illam, quæ est verus ultimus finis humanæ natura: quibusdam nature? For with certain [actions] it seems impossible to affirm this in
enim videtur non posse hoc affirmari ullo modo cum peccatum any way since sin is an aversion or directing away from God. But others
sit aversio vel deordinatio a Deo, alii vero <col. b> contrar- show the contrary, because a human being seeks a certain similitude to
ium probant, quia homo etiam in his actionibus quærit quam- God even in these actions.
dam similitudinem cum Deo.
85	3. Assertio
decisiva proximi
dubii.
5. Breviter tamen dico tertio, hominem, dum peccat, per ip- 85R 5. Nevertheless, I briefly say, thirdly, that a human being, while he The third
assertion that
decides the last
doubt.
summet actum peccati, aliquo modo operari propter Deum, non sins, through the very act itself of sin, in some way acts for the sake of
tamen eo quo per actum honestum. Intelligitur conclusio de pec- God, yet not in that [way] in which [he does] through a morally good
cato ratione actus positivi, nam malitia nullo modo est propter act. The conclusion is understood concerning sin by reason of a positive
finem ultimum, imo nec propter finem, quia ipsa non est intenta, act, for malice is in no way for the sake of the ultimate end. Indeed, it
90	Ostenditur
assertio ex
convenientia
actus turpis &
honesti.
Primo.
sed per accidens consecuta. Probatur ergo utraque pars conclu- 90R is not for the sake of any end, because it itself was not intended but was
sionis, explicando convenientiam et differentiam, quæ in hoc attained per accidens. Therefore, each part of the conclusion is shown, by The assertion is
shown by the
agreement
between
shameful and
virtuous acts.
First.
convenire potest inter actum turpem et honestum: nam primo explaining the agreement and difference which can come together in this
si uterque comparetur ad Deum, uterque est ex causalitate et ef- between shameful and morally good actions. For, firstly, if each is com-
ficientia Dei. Unde ex hac parte necesse est, ut uterque aliquo pared to God, each exists by the causality and efficacy of God. Hence,
95 modo ordinetur in Deum, nam sicut Deus propter seipsum om- 95R from this part it is necessary that each in some way is ordered to God,
nia creavit, ita etiam propter seipsum concurrit ad actum peccati, for just as God created everything for the sake of himself, so also he con-
5In this text I will translate ‘honestum’ and cognates with ‘moral good’ and cognates. I am not sure that would always be a good translation but it is close enough in the present
context.

-- 3 of 4 --

Suárez, De Fine Hominis, disp. 3, sect. 6 4
et in hoc ipso ostendit bonitatem suam. Et hoc generaliter docet curs with an act of sin for the sake of himself. And in this very thing
Secundo. D. Thomas 3, contra Gentes, cap. 17. Secundo conveniunt, quod he reveals his goodness. St. Thomas teaches this in general in SCG III,
uterque actus habet necessariam connexionem et dependentiam c. 17. Secondly, they agree in that each act has a necessary connection Second.
100 cum Deo: unde fit ut peccator dum appetit aliquod bonum, quod 100R with and dependency on God. Hence it happens that when the sinner
sine Deo habere non potest, implicite appetat Deum esse: quan- desires some good—which he cannot have without God—he implicitly
quam in hoc non tam respiciat Deum ut finem, quam ut prin- desires for God to exist. Nevertheless, in this he does not so much re-
cipium, et quasi medium necessarium ad suum appetitum im- spect God as end than as principle and as a necessary means, as it were,
Tertio. plendum. Tertio vero conveniunt, quod in utroque reperitur to satisfying his desire. And, thirdly, they agree in that in each is found a Third.
105 quædam participatio divinæ bonitatis et felicitatis, nam peccator 105R certain participation in divine goodness and felicity, for when the sinner
dum peccat appetit etiam aliquo modo felicitatem, et in hoc ipso sins he also desires felicity in some way. And in this very thing he desires
appetit assimilari Deo, quod commune est omnibus creaturis, ut to imitate God, which is common to all creatures, as St. Thomas said in
divus Thomas dixit 1, 2, quæst. 1, articulis 7 et 8. Et ita exponit [ST ] IaIIæ.1.7 and 8. And in this way St. Thomas explains that locution
divus Thomas hanc locutionem in 4, distinct. 49, quæst. 1, artic- in [Sent.] IV, dist. 49, q. 1, art. 3, qc. 4, ad 2 and 3. It is also Augustine’s
110 ulo 3, quæstiunc. 4, ad 2 et 3, et etiam est sententia Augustini, 110R view in Conf. II, c. 4 and 6.
lib. 2, Conf., cap. 4 et 6.
Explicatur eadem
assertio ex
disconvenientia
eorumdem
actuum.
Primo.
6. Differunt tamen inter se actus pravus et honestus, quod 6. Yet corrupt and morally good acts differ from each other in that The same
assertion is
explained from
the disagreement
of the same acts.
First.
actus peccati revera nullo modo pertinet ad veram hominis beat- the acts of sin in no way really pertain to the true happiness of a human
itudinem, quæ in Deo consistit, nec tanquam pars ejus, nec tan- being, which consists in God, nor to so much as a part of it nor to an
115 quam perfectio accidentalis illius; actus autem honestas, secun- accidental perfection of it. But a morally good act, considered according
dum suam honestatem et speciem consideratus, pertinet aliquo 115R to its moral goodness and its species, pertains in some way to the beauty
Secundo. modo ad decorem et perfectionem beatitudinis. Unde fit se- (decorem) and perfection of happiness. Hence it happens, secondly, that Second.
cundo, ut actus malus ex natura sua non sit medium ad conse- a bad act by its nature is not a means to following God, insofar as he is
quendum Deum, quatenus est finis <39> ultimus hominis: actus the ultimate end for a human being. But a morally good act of itself is
120 autem honestus de se sit accommodatus ad consequendum hunc suitable for following this end. And, hence, finally, [it happens] that an Third.
finem: atque hinc tandem actus honestus simpliciter dici potest 120R morally good act can be said without qualification by its nature to tend
Tertio. natura sua tendere in Deum tanquam in finem sibi proportion- to God as to an end proportionate to itself, both because it pleases God
atum, et quia ex se placet Deo, et ad ipsum est referibilis: actus by itself and is referrible to him. A corrupt act, however, cannot be said
autem pravus non dici potest proprie, et simpliciter esse propter properly and without qualification to be for the sake of God, when all the
125 Deum, cum prædicta omnia in illum non conveniant, sed tan- just-mentioned things do not agree with him. Rather, it may be said to be
tum secundum quid ac remote dicetur esse propter imitationem 125R only with qualification and remotely for the sake of a certain imitation
quamdam divinas perfectionis, quam suo modo intendunt om- of divine perfection, which all natural agents intend in their way—in this
nia naturalia agentia, in quo est quodammodo peccator inferior the sinner is in a certain way inferior to the natural agents, because of the
illis, quoniam debito modo, et juxta ordinem divinæ providen- way he ought [to be]—and according to the order of divine providence
130 tiæ intendunt omnia naturalia agentia assimilari Deo: peccator all natural agents intend to imitate God. But the sinner as such [intends]
vero ut sic, indebito modo, ut præter ordinem quærit assimilari 130R it in an undue way, so that he seeks to imitate God in a way contrary to
Deo, et ideo impropriissime dicitur operari propter Deum. the order. And so he is said most improperly to act for the sake of God.
110 2 ] 1 V.
124 autem ] om. V.

-- 4 of 4 --
