Sydney Penner
Last revised: October 9, 2008
Francisco Suárez, S. J.
DE BONITATE ET MALITIA HUMANORUM ACTUUM, DISP. 11, Q. 21
<432, col. b>WHETHER THE HUMAN WILL, IN ORDER TO BE RIGHT, MUST BE CONFORMED TO THE
DIVINE WILL THAT ORDERS THE ACTIONS OF THE HUMAN WILL ITSELF (Utrum voluntas humana, ut
recta sit, debeat conformari divinæ et disponenti de actibus ipsius voluntatis humanæ)
1. Prima assertio.—Hæc quæstio est facilis, suppositis, 1. First assertion.—This question is easy once we as-
quæ diximus, et ideo omissis opinionibus quas referam, sume what we said and therefore with the opinions to
sectione sequenti, dicendum primo. Voluntas humana, which I refer in the following section omitted, it should
ut sit recta, debet conformari divinæ, ut præcipienti: be said first: the human will must be conformed to
hoc est per se notum, quia voluntas divina natura sua what the divine will instructs in order to be right. This
est superior, et habet jus et virtutem inducendi obliga- is known per se, since the divine will is superior by its
tionem, si eam velit efficaciter imponere, nam sicut in nature and has the right and the strength to introduce
aliis rebus voluntas Dei est omnipotens et efficax, ita obligation, if it wishes to effectively impose it. For just
et in homine: sed voluntas divina præcipiens est illa, as with other things the will of God is omnipotent and
qua vult absolute imponere homini hujusmodi obliga- effective, so also with human beings. But the divine
tionem: ergo non potest humana voluntas esse bona, will instructing is that by which it wishes absolutely to
nisi1 conformis huic voluntati divinæ, et hoc est, quod impose on a human being an obligation of this kind.
aliis verbis dicunt theologi, voluntatem humanam de- Therefore, the human will cannot be good except it is
bere conformari divinæ quoad voluntatem signi, nam conformed to this divine will. This is what the the-
unum signum voluntatis divinæ est præceptum. ologians say in other words: the human will must be
conformed to the divine will as to the will of a sign, for
one sign of the divine will is a precept.
1 Changed from ‘nisit’.
2. Quæstiuncula suborta.—Sed quæres unde oriatur 2. A small question that comes up.—But you may ask
prædicta obligatio, solet enim dici non oriri ex speciali where the mentioned obligation comes from, for it is
aliquo præcepto, sed in singulis materiis oriri ex præ- usually said that it does not arise from some special pre-
ceptis ad illas pertinentibus, quia alias quotiescumque cept but that in individual occasions it arises from the
homo peccaret in aliqua materia, transgrederetur duo precepts pertaining to them. Otherwise, whenever a
præcepta. Unum proprium et particulare talis ma- human being sins on some occasion he transgresses two
teriæ, ut non furandi; alterum non discordandi a div- precepts: one proper and particular to the occasion (for
ina voluntate, seu obediendi Deo; sed quamvis verum example, that one should not steal) and another that he
sit hæc duo comparari, ut generale quid ex parte ob- should not go against the divine will or that he should
jectorum materialium: nihilominus tamen negari non obey God. But, although it is true that these two are
potest quin speciali titulo, et ratione teneatur homo compared as something general on the part of the ma-
subjicere hoc modo voluntatem suam divinæ, quia et terial objects, nevertheless it cannot be denied but that
Deus habet proprium jus exigendi ab homine hanc con- a human being is obliged by a special title and reason in
formitatem, ut quia hæc est sufficiens ratio specialis vir- this way to subject his will to the divine [will], because
tutis si sit per se intenta, et e contrario constituet etiam God also has a proper right for driving out this con-
specialem malitiam, si directe, et speciali contemptu formity from a human being, so that because this is a
1Latin text is from the Vivès edition.

-- 1 of 5 --

Suárez De Bonitate et Malitia Humanorum Actuum disp. 11, s. 2 2
velit homo discordare ab hac divina voluntate, juxta sufficient reason of special virtue if it is intended per se
superius dicta de circumstantiis generalibus: intercedit and, conversely, it will also constitute a special badness
ergo hic proprium quoddam præceptum, quamvis ex if a human being directly and with a special contempt
parte materiæ generale sit, et quodammodo censeatur wishes to go against this divine will, as was said ear-
in aliis inclusum, quasi materialiter et generice. lier concerning general circumstances. Therefore, here
a certain proper precept, although it is general on the
part of the occasion, is also thought in a certain way to
be confined to others, as if materially and generically.
3. Objectio.—Dices: omne præceptum manat primo a 3. An objection.—You may say: every precept flows
divina voluntate, hoc autem præceptum parendi, seu first from the divine will, but this precept to obey or
conformandi se huic divinæ voluntati, non potest ex conform oneself to this divine will cannot arise from
ipsa divina vo- <433> luntate oriri, quia de hac vol- the divine will itself, because the question will return
untate redibit quæstio, et sic procedemus in infinitum. about this will and we will thus proceed into infinity. It
Respondetur imprimis hoc argumento declarari, quod is responded first to this argument that this shows what
superius dicebamus, aliquam obligationem naturalem we were saying earlier, [namely], that some natural
honeste operandi intrinsece oriri ex rebus ipsis præcisa obligation to act honestly arises intrinsically from the
divina voluntate, atque ita in præsenti ex ipsa naturali things themselves apart from the divine will and thus
subjectione hominis ad Deum, et naturali dominio Dei in the present case from the natural subjection itself of
in hominem per se est intrinsece necessaria ad hones- a human being to God and the natural dominion of
tatem morum, ut si Deus habeat hanc voluntatem præ- God with respect to a human being is per se and intrin-
cipientem, ut homo se illi conformet; unde hæc ratio sically necessary for the honesty of [his] behaviour, so
præcepti non oritur primo ex voluntate divina, sed ex that if God has this will to instruct the human con-
natura objectorum: ad hanc autem obligationem ac- forms himself to it. Hence, this nature of the precept
cedit etiam ipsa divina voluntas, quæ cum simplicis- does not arise first from the divine will, but from the
sima sit, includit omnem reflexionem, quæ a nobis ex- nature of the objects. Moreover, the divine will itself
cogitari potest: unde simul vult, et teneri hominem ad also approaches this obligation, which, although it is
aliquid faciendum, et consequenter etiam teneri ad se most simple, includes every reflection that can be con-
conformandum huic divinæ voluntati. trived by us. Hence, it wills at the same time both that
a human being be obliged to doing something and, con-
sequently, also be obliged to conform himself to this
divine will.
4. Corollarium.—Ex his autem intelligitur talem de- 4. Corollary.—But from these it is understood that this
bere esse hanc conformitatem, qualis fuerit divinæ conformity ought to be such as will be the disposition
voluntatis dispositio: interdum enim intelligi potest of the divine will. For sometimes it can be understood
Deum velle obligare hominem ad volendum aliquem taht God wishes to oblige a human being to willing
specialem actum vel effectum materialem, ut sic dicam, some special act or material effect, if I may speak this
non tamen ad formale, seu speciale motivum ejus, ut way, but not to a formal or special motive for it. For
fortasse voluit Christum velle mortem suam, et tunc example, perhaps he wishes Christ to wish his death
satis est conformari huic divinæ voluntati, volendo and then it is sufficient to be conformed to this divine
materiale objectum, quamvis in formali, seu ratione will by wishing the material object, although there can
volendi possit esse magna varietas: si autem Deus tali be great variety in the formal [object] or in the reason
voluntate sua præscriberet etiam rationem volendi, for willing. But if God were by such a will of his also
oporteret etiam in illa conformari: atque idem dicen- to prescribe the reason for willing, then it is necessary
dum est quando voluntas divina vult me teneri ad effi- to also be conformed in that. And the same should
caciter volendum aliquid, tunc enim debeo conformari be said when the divine will wishes that I be obliged
habendo talem actum efficacem voluntatis meæ: non to efficaciously willing something, for then I ought to
autem repugnat huic conformitati, quod habeam ineffi- be conformed by having such an efficacious act of my
cacem actum repugnantem per displicentiam, seu sim- will. Moreover, it is not repugnant to this conformity
plicem effectum, quo vellem ne Deus id præciperet, seu that I have an inefficacious opposing act through dis-

-- 2 of 5 --

Suárez De Bonitate et Malitia Humanorum Actuum disp. 11, s. 2 3
vellet; cujus rei exemplum fortasse habemus in Christo pleasure or simple effect, by which I wish that God
Domino, et potest etiam exponi, nam si quis habeat had not instructed or willed it. Perhaps we have an ex-
præceptum matrimonii, etiam per expressam revela- ample of this in our Lord Christ. And it can also be
tionem divinæ voluntatis, satisfacit volendo efficaciter explained [in this way]: for if anyone has the precept
matrimonium, quamvis simul habeat simplicem effec- of matrimony, even through an express revelation of
tum ad castitatem, desiderans quantum est in se illam the divine will, he satisfies [it] by efficaciously willing
servare, si Deus voluisset; et ratio est clara, quia pos- matrimony, even though he has at the same time a sim-
terior hæc voluntas non contradicit primæ, et potest ple effect for chastity, desiring to preserve it insofar as
habere honestum objectum, quo fit, ut si Deus velit it is in him if God would have willed it.1 And the rea-
hominem ad utrumque obligare, id est, ad volendum son is clear, since this latter will does not contradict
aliquid simpliciter: et nullo modo nolendum etiam the first and it can have an honest object by which it
per actum sim- <col. b> plicem, tunc teneatur homo happens that if God wills to oblige a human being to
neutro modo discordare a divina voluntate, sicut in either, that is, to willing something strictly speaking
universum quandocumque dicimus hominem teneri and in no way also to nill through a simple act, then
ad non volendum aliquid, tenetur conformari divina the human is obliged to disagree in neither way with
voluntati, saltem per carentiam actus. the divine will, just as in general whenever we say that
a human being is obliged to not willing something, he
is obliged to be conformed to the divine will at least
through the absence of the act.
1 What is this ‘simple effect’? Note the ‘simple affect’ of n. 6.
5. Secunda assertio bimembris.—Dicendum secundo. 5. The second assertion in two parts.—It should be said,
Quando Deus vult absolute et efficaciter hominem secondly, that when God wishes absolutely and effica-
aliquid velle, non potest voluntas humana discordare ciously that a human being will something, the human
a divina, potest tamen habere simplicem effectum circa will cannot disagree with the divine will, yet it can still
contrarium actum, seu circa carentiam illius actus. have a simple effect concerning the contrary act or con-
Prior pars intelligenda est de potestate in sensu com- cerning the absence of the former act. The former part
posite, et ita ratio est clara, quia voluntas divina effi- should be understood of power in the composite sense
cax, et absoluta simpliciter frustrari non potest cum and then the reason is clear. For the efficacious and
sit infinita. Unde si homini constet Deum hoc modo strictly speaking absolute divine will cannot be frus-
statuisse ipsum aliquid velle, fieri non potest, ut per trated, since it is infinite. Hence, if it were evident to
contrarium actum efficacem renitatur huic divinæ vol- a human being that God had decided in this way that
untati, quia jam illi proponitur ut impossibile illud he willed something, it cannot happen that he struggle
objectum: non potest autem voluntas ferri actu effi- against this divine will through a contrary efficacious
caci in objectum repræsentatum, ut impossibile. Sed act, since now that object is now proposed to him as
tunc occurrit objectio communis, voluntatem scilicet impossible. But the will cannot be brought by an effi-
necessitari, de quo alibi latius: nunc negatur simpliciter cacious act to an object represented as impossible. But
sequela, necessitatur tunc quidem voluntas, ut habere then a common objection occurs, namely, that the will
non possit inefficacem actum contrarium propter re- is necessitated. [I will say] more about this elsewhere.
pugnantiam objecti, non tamen necessitatur ad haben- For now, the sequel is simply denied. The will indeed
dum actum quem Deus vult illam velle, quia nulla is then necessitated so that it cannot have an ineffica-
causa est, quæ hanc necessitatem imponat. cious contrary act on account of the repugnance of the
object. Yet it is not necessitated to having an act which
God wills it to have, since there is no cause which im-
poses this necessity.
6. Altera vero pars conclusionis est clara ratione supra 6. But the other part of the conclusion is clear from the
facta, quia simplex displicentia non est contraria huic argument given above, since a simple displeasure is not
divinæ voluntati, nec Deus vult me non habere hanc contrary to this divine will nor does God will me not
displicentiam, quamvis efficaciter velit me velle aliquid, to have this displeasure, although he may efficaciously

-- 3 of 5 --

Suárez De Bonitate et Malitia Humanorum Actuum disp. 11, s. 2 4
quia illa duo non repugnant: ergo ex vi illius voluntatis will me to will something, since those two are not re-
divinæ non repugnat me habere hanc simplicem dis- pugnant. Therefore, it is not repugnant for me to have
plicentiam, et alioqui hoc non est per se malum, quia this simple displeasure by reason of the strength of that
non repugnat divinæ voluntati, et in objecte potest divine will. And, in any case, this is not evil in itself,
habere aliquod motivum honestum. Sed advertendum since it is not repugnant to the divine will and it can
est hanc displicentiam non debere esse de efficacia di- have some honest motive in the object. But it should be
vinæ voluntatis, hæc enim displicentia esset intrinsece noted that this displeasure ought not to be concerning
mala ex objecto, ut si quis desideraret resistere efficaci the efficacy of the divine will for this displeasure would
voluntati Dei, et illa displiceret, quia non possent hu- be instrinsically evil from the object, so that if anyone
jusmodi effectus liberi non esse contra rationem, quia were to desire to resist the efficacious will of God and
objectum eorum est desiderare aliquid contra volun- to displease it, therefore—since free effects of this kind
tatem Dei, versari ergo debet hic effectus circa rem could not but be against reason, since their object is
ipsam nude consideratam, aut circa ipsam voluntatem to desire something against the will of God—this effect
Dei, quatenus libere posset Deus velle hoc non esse, ut must be directed to the bare matter considered in itself
si homo desideret simplici affectu Deum aliquid non or to the will itself of God. Insofar as God can freely
velle, aut, se non habere talem actum sub intellecta con- will this not to be, as if the human being desires by a
<434> ditione, si Deus ita vellet, atque hoc modo nulla simple affect that God not will something or that he
est in hoc actu difficultas. not hold such an act under the understood condition
‘if God wills thus’ and in this way there is no difficulty
in this act.1
1 How does this sentence work?
7. Tertia assertio.—Dicendum tertio. Ut voluntas hu- 7. Third assertion.—It should be said, thirdly, that in
mana sit recta, non est necesse ut sit conformis div- order for the human will to be right, it is not neces-
inæ voluntati inefficaciter volenti, seu consulenti ac- sary that it be conformed to the divine will ineffica-
tum voluntatis humanæ. Hæc conclusio est per se ciously willing or counselling an act of the human will.
clara, ut patet in voluntate consiliorum, nam sine du- This conclusion is clear per se, as is clear with the will
bio hoc modo Deus vult homines velle suam perfec- of counsels, for without doubt God in this way wants
tionem, vel castitatem, etc. Et tamen homo non pec- humans to will their perfection or chastity, etc. And
cat efficaciter volendo aliud ab hisce consiliis diversum yet a human being does not sin by efficaciously willing
: et ratio est quia nec Deus per hanc voluntatem in- something else that is opposed to these counsels. And
ducit positivam obligationem, quia non vult efficaciter the reason is because God neither introduces positive
hominem ad hoc obligare, neque etiam objectum ip- obligation through this will (since he does not will ef-
sum talis per se, et natura sua inducit illam, cum non ficaciously to oblige a human being to this) nor does
sit per se necessarium ad bonos mores. such an object itself introduce it through itself and by
its nature, since it is not in itself necessary for good
morals.
8. Quarta assertio.—Ultimo dicendum, voluntatem hu- 8. Fourth assertion.—Lastly, it should be said that the
manam non debere conformari voluntati divinæ sibi human will need not be conformed to the divine will
aliquid permittenti; sed advertendum est quod dixi, permitting something to it. But it should be noticed
aliud esse loqui de permissione, aliud de permisso; per- what was said, [namely], that it is one thing to speak
missio enim non est actus voluntatis humanæ, sed est of permission and another to speak of having been per-
objectum aliud voluntatis divinæ efficacis duo inclu- mitted. For permission is not an act of the human will,
dens, scilicet concursum necessarium ad actum posi- but is another object of the efficacious divine will in-
tivum peccati, quem Deus vult dare quantum est de cluding two things, namely, the necessary concursus
se, et negationem alterius auxilii, vel providentiæ, qua for a positive act of sin, which God wills to give inso-
Deus posset talem actum impedire, et non vult: et far as it is of him, and the negation of other assistance
quoad hanc permissionem potest, et fortasse debet or providence, by which God could impede such an
voluntas humana conformari divinæ, si homini con- act but does not wish to. Both as long as this permis-

-- 4 of 5 --

Suárez De Bonitate et Malitia Humanorum Actuum disp. 11, s. 2 5
stet Deum efficaciter velle talem permissionem, sed sion can [be] and the human will perhaps ought to be
hoc non spectat ad præsentem, sed ad sequentem sec- conformed to the divine [will], if it were evident to a
tionem: nam eadem est ratio de hac permissione, quæ human being that God efficaciously wills such a per-
est de aliis objectis, quæ non sunt actus voluntatis nos- mission.1 But this does not appear at present but in
træ: nam hæc permissio, ut dixi, non est humanæ vol- the following section. For the argument is the same
untatis. Conclusio ergo intelligitur de actu permisso, et concerning this permission as it is concerning other
sic est manifesta, quia Deus volendo permittere talem objects which are not acts of our will. For this per-
actum ex vi hujus voluntatis, non vult actum ipsum, mission, as I said, is not of the human will. Therefore,
non solum actu efficaci, imo nec inefficaci, quia fieri the conclusion is understood concerning an act having
potest ut nullo modo talis actus illi placeat: ergo talis been permitted and then it is obvious, since God in
voluntas nullam potest inducere obligationem confor- willing to permit such an act by the strength of this
mitatis ad ipsam, quin potius si actus permissus ex se will does not will the act itself, not only by an effica-
malus sit, male faciet voluntas se conformando huic cious act nor, indeed, by an inefficacious [act], since it
permissioni quoad actum permissum, imo omnis mali- can happen that such an act is not pleasing to him in ei-
tia voluntatis humanæ in hoc consistit. ther way. Therefore, such a will cannot introduce any
obligation to conform to it, without rather if the act
having been permitted is evil in itself, the will will act
badly in conforming itself to this permission with re-
spect to the act having been permitted. Indeed, all evil
of the human will consists in this.
1 ?
9. Objectio.—Sed contra. Nam hæc voluntas permis- 9. An objection.—But to the contrary: for this permis-
siva Dei includit voluntatem efficacem ipsius actus per- sive will of God includes the will efficacious of the act
missi, imo multi putant necessariam esse voluntatem having been permitted. Indeed, many think that it nec-
Dei efficacem prædefinientem talem actum pro mate- essary that the efficacious will of God preordains such
riali: ergo si homini constet de hac divina voluntate an act through material. Therefore, if it is evident to
<col. b> permittente; non potest non conformari illi the human being that the divine will is permitting, it
saltem quoad materialem actum. Respondetur assump- cannot not be conformed to it, at least with respect to
tum esse falsum, et contrarium, ut existimo divinæ the material act. It is responded that the assumption is
bonitati, nam id quod dicitur materiale in actu peccati false and contrary to how I view divine goodness. For
est voluntas mentiendi, furandi, etc. Quod plane re- that which is called material in the act of sin is the will
pugnat voluntati divinæ, et revera si Deus id ita vellet, deceiving, stealing, and so on. This is plainly repug-
et homini de hoc constaret, non video quo modo pec- nant to the divine will. And, in reality, if God were
caret in hoc se conformando tali voluntati Dei. Re- thus to wish that and this were evident to a human, I
spondetur ergo negando assumptum: nam voluntas do not see in what way he would sin in this by con-
permittendi tantum includit illa duo supra explicata, forming himself to such a will of God. Therefore, it is
quæ potest Deus velle etiamsi efficaciter non velit ac- responded by denying the assumption. For the permit-
tum permissum in seipso maxime prius ratione, quam ting will only includes the two things explained above,
præficiat hominem illum operaturum, sed de hac re which God can will even if he does not efficaciously
latius alibi. will the act having been permitted in itself especially
for the earlier reason, which places the human being
in charge of doing that. But more about this matter
elsewhere.

-- 5 of 5 --
